Title: A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25200v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:20:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# A H YBRID CNN-LSTM I NTRUSION DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR CYBERSECURITY IN SMART RENEWABLE ENERGY GRIDS 

Sajib Debnath 

O&M Analytics, AES Clean Energy The AES Corporation Louisville, CO 80027, USA 

sajib.debnath@aes.com 

Remon Das 

Renewable Infrastructure Dominion Energy Richmond, VA 23219, USA 

remondas4@gmail.com 

June 25, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

The accelerated digitalization of renewable energy smart grids through IoT sensors, Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), and SCADA systems has significantly expanded the attack surface for sophisticated cyberattacks, including False Data Injection (FDI) attacks that stealthily distort state estimation and DoS/DDoS attacks that flood communication channels. Current Intrusion Detection However, intrusion detection systems (IDS) exhibit three inherent limitations: inadequate modeling of the temporal progression of multi-step attacks, degraded scalability under extremely skewed class distributions of standard benchmark datasets, and restricted generalization across heterogeneous network environments. In this study, we present a Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS that jointly exploits CNN-based spatial feature extraction and LSTM-based temporal sequence modeling, enabling the detection of instantaneous volumetric anomalies and gradually evolving low and slow-attack campaigns in real time. The model was trained using a seven-step preprocessing workflow comprising missing-value imputation, min-max normalization, one-hot encoding, SMOTE class balancing, mutual-information feature selection, causal temporal sequence construction ( T = 10 ), and stratified partitioning. LSTM (96.1%), Random Forest (93.5%), SVM (91.2%) and KNN (89.7%); in NSL-KDD, it reaches 98.2% precision versus 96.4% (LSTM), 95.2% (CNN), 92.7% (Random Forest) and 90.8% (SVM), with margins of 2–9 percentage points in all measures. An ablation analysis identified SMOTE balancing as the most influential design choice ( −3.7 pp F1 without it). The model achieves a real-time inference throughput of 27,800 flows/s on GPU and 0.082 ms/sample CPU latency in FP32„ with INT8 quantization providing an additional 3.1× speedup at 0.3% accuracy loss, confirming deployment feasibility on resource-constrained IEDs with <128MB memory and establishing a deployable deep-learning framework for securing next-generation renewable energy smart grid infrastructure. 

Keywords Cybersecurity · Smart Grid · Deep Learning · Hybrid CNN-LSTM · Intrusion Detection · False Data Injection · DoS · Renewable Energy · SMOTE · Edge Deployment 

# 1 Introduction 

We are usufructing from the largest energy transformation in history across the globe. Over the past decade, renewable energy sources (primarily solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind) have become massive shares of global electricity generation through climate policy mandates and the decreasing prices of renewable energy technologies, together with increasing awareness about security of supply. This share is expected to keep climbing rapidly throughout the next decade [ 1 ], making it an increasingly large segment of our global electricity production. This extensive growth embraces smart grid infrastructure, or two-way digitally mediated energy distribution (AMI), Internet of Things (IoT) connected sensors, SCADA and Energy Management Systems (EMS). The Confluence of Deep Learning Frameworks IoT-based sensing has significantly improved the operational efficiency of smart grids, however, attaining 93.38% prediction accuracy for energy demand and 96.25% accurate grid power stability [ 2], rendering potentially quite lucrative both the technology itself, and also the heavenly urgency of delivering appropriate defensive mechanisms for such AI-driven frameworks." 

> arXiv:2606.25200v1 [cs.LG] 23 Jun 2026

A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids Smart grids have a uniquely complex risk landscape that focuses on cybersecurity. In a rational way, smart grid cyberthreats that have occurred over the years have been categorically classified into five primary modalities: Electricity Theft Attacks (ETA), False Data Injection Attacks on State Estimation (FDIA), False Command Attacks (FCA), Communication Traffic Attacks (CTA), and adversarial learning attacks (ALA) [ 3]. Consequently, SMG Cyber Defense has similarly been categorized into reactive methods (IDS/signature-based detection) and proactive mechanisms (IPS/MTD/DL-based anomaly detection) [ 4 ], drawing the conceptual boundary on which the proposed model is built. Among the five threat modalities impacted by the issue of sufficient sensor observability, FDIA is particularly pernicious: an adversary equipped with partial knowledge about the power system topology can deliberately corrupt sensor measurements so that conventional bad data detection (BDD) algorithms are unable to detect them and incorrectly derived state estimates cause erroneous dispatch decisions [5] Research on machine learning for network intrusion detection has an established pedigree. Motivated by the statistical problems caused by duplicate record inflation in the original KDD Cup 1999 benchmark, additional work was carried out to create an updated dataset called NSL-KDD [ 6], which continues to be a widely used, cross-generational benchmarking dataset. This has been reinforced through thorough comparative analyses that confirmed deep learning qualitatively outperforming traditional ML methods over a variety of network traffic contexts [ 7]. Intrusion detection systems based on CNNs encode features of network traffic as 1D or 2D tensors, which in turn allows convolutional filters to automatically learn discriminative local patterns and deliver a strong performance on benchmark datasets, notwithstanding their limited ability to detect slow, temporally dispersed attack patterns [ 8 ]. This temporal limit is overcome using LSTM-based approaches, which show very good detection of multi-step exploitation attacks by sequentially modeling flow behavior [ 9]. Hybrid CNN-LSTM architectures have been successfully studied in neighbouring domains, where they innately outperform single components. As the most commonly adopted evaluation benchmark for modern IDS, the CICIDS2017 benchmark [ 10 ] consists of approximately 2.8 million labeled network flow records encompassing ten attack categories. It is inherently imbalanced with an extreme class imbalance across different classes, which provides a crucial limitation for fair detection across all classes in a multi-class scenario. The Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique [ 11 ] is critical to address this imbalance to achieve consistently high recall on rare yet operationally important attack categories such as infiltration. The Adam optimizer [ 12 ] was used for model training because it offers adaptive learning rate adjustment and has become the de-facto optimization algorithm of deep learning IDS pipelines [13]. At the theoretical level of faithfulness, the proposed architecture is based on two landmark contributions. Specifically, deep learning, as a representational learning paradigm [ 14 ] forms the basis for automatically deriving feature hierarchies from raw network flow data with no manual effort in feature engineering. The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture [ 15 ] overcomes the vanishing gradient issue found in traditional recurrent networks and allows the modelling of long-term temporal dependencies, a property that directly pertains to recognizing multi-step low-and-slow attack campaigns occurring through sequential smart grid traffic flows. Previous observations confirm that coordinated FDIA campaigns remain feasible against even hardened power system configurations [ 16 ], and an extensive survey of the variety in FDIA approaches confirms that injection attacks can nearly always escape residual-based BDD given only partial topology knowledge from the attacker [ 17 ], both of which motivate the anomaly based, data-driven detection paradigm adopted in this study. If attacks penetrate deeper within the grid infrastructure, where they can cause physical damage to equipment, longer-duration outages, and cascading grid failures, these operational ramifications are also a national security threat, as evidenced by the 2015-2016 Ukraine power grid cyberattacks [ 7], the 2021 Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack [ 8], and other significant compromises of industrial safety systems, such as Triton/TRISIS health monitoring solutions [9]. Traditional ML-based IDS, such as SVM, random forest, and K-nearest neighbors, possess three major structural limitations: they do not model the time evolution of attack patterns in a dynamic environment; they require an expensive retraining process periodically; and they poorly match the real-time execution requirements needed by real systems, such as smart grids. Both standalone CNN and standalone LSTM cannot adapt to the dual spatial-temporal characteristics of smart grid network traffic [3, 4]. This study proposes a Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection System (IDS) that unifies both architectures in an end-to-end trainable model, which is rigorously validated against the CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD benchmarks. The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows: • Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS Architecture: A novel deep learning framework that combines CNN-based spatial feature extraction with LSTM-based temporal modeling, enabling effective detection of both instantaneous and multi-stage cyberattacks. 2A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids • Seven-Stage Preprocessing Pipeline: A comprehensive data processing pipeline addressing missing values, normalization, categorical encoding, SMOTE-based class balancing, mutual information feature selection, temporal sequence construction, and stratified dataset partitioning. • Cross-Dataset Generalization: Extensive evaluation on CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD datasets under identical experimental settings, demonstrating strong generalization across heterogeneous network environments. • State-of-the-Art Performance: Achieves 98.7% accuracy and 0.995 AUC-ROC on CICIDS2017, outperform-ing traditional machine learning (SVM, Random Forest, KNN) and standalone deep learning (CNN, LSTM) models by 2.6–9.0 percentage points. • Ablation and Sensitivity Analysis: Systematic evaluation of architectural and preprocessing components, identifying SMOTE-based class balancing as the most impactful factor and validating design choices. • Real-Time and Edge Deployment Feasibility: Demonstrates high inference throughput (27,800 flows/second), low CPU latency, and INT8 quantization compatibility for deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. 

# 2 Related Work 

Over time, the literature on smart grid cybersecurity has provided an organized view of the threat landscape. The most comprehensive taxonomy arranges smart grid cyberthreats into five basic categories characterized by the targets and goals of the attack, as summarized below: (1) Electricity Theft Attacks (ETAs): Individual users faking their meter readings; (2) False Data Injection Attacks on State Estimation (FDIA): Reflects corrupted state estimation and passively avoids traditional bad data detection (BDD);(3) False Command Attacks on PMU data and relay commands termed as FCA; this includes passive queries that are capable of fabricating relays’ states(e.g., boost voltage or generator powering-up modes), so as to corrupt operation decisions while at the same time bypassing routine command BDD;(4) Communication Traffic Attack appears such as Denial-of-Service attack, Distributed-Denial-of-Service attack, Time Delay Attack which is collecting enough but false observations to create wrong conclusions thus making it a symbolical formulation context communication structure built upon uncertain metrics and obscured by heavy use simulate seasonings;(5)Adversarial Learning Attack exploiting vulnerabilities within DL models that have already been deployed [ 3]. This taxonomy is further enriched by distinguishing between reactive (IDS, signature-based, anomaly based) and proactive cyber defense (IPS, encryption, Moving Target Defense; DL-based anomaly detection), which delineates the conceptual space in which the proposed work takes place. In addition to the unique survey on algorithms for detecting FDIA [ 18 ], the authors further specified the mathematical bounds under which injection vectors can pass BDD and demonstrated that even detectors based purely on thresholds over residuals are inherently susceptible to topology-aware adversaries. Extending this, real-time deep-learning frameworks have shown the ability to detect tiny sensor faults in smart grid state estimation that go undetected by physics-based monitors altogether [19]. ETA drove research momentum in the early stages, whereas FDIA has grown exponentially since 2018 and represents such a large proportion of publications that it is now the most common topic. Consequently, ALA is an emerging category with increasing interest because of the inherent understanding that DL models leveraged for grid control are attack surfaces themselves. Among the DL mechanisms, FCL and RNN are the main streams. However, with respect to the topology characteristics of the power grid (buses = nodes, transmission lines = edges), GNN has been gaining popularity in recent years, together with AM, which is increasingly acknowledged for its ability to focus learning on the most discriminative measurement features during cyber-attack detection. These advances have strongly driven the development of principled frameworks for feature construction that derive structured representations from unstructured network flow data [ 20 ] and established an analytical foundation for feature engineering strategies used in existing deep learning intrusion detection system (IDS) pipelines. The KDD Cup 1999 was the first application of machine learning to network intrusion detection, resulting in many research papers investigating these classifiers (Decision Trees, Naïve Bayes, kNN, and SVM). The KDD Cup 1999 data were discovered to have serious statistical flaws, especially regarding the inflation of reported accuracy by duplicate records, and NSL-KDD has been suggested as an improved gold-standard benchmark and is now a well-couched network intrusion detection system (IDS) evaluation dataset [ 5 ]. This traditional IDS application is based on the theoretical framework of support vector classification [ 21 ]; it has strong generalizability for linearly separable binary detection tasks but suffers from scalability constraints in high-dimensional multi-class network traffic. It was (and still is) common practice to achieve state-of-the-art performance in multi-class IDS scenarios through the use of ensemble methods such as Random Forest [ 22 ]; variance reduction from aggregated decision boundaries over multiple decorrelated trees consistently provides a detectable benefit. Recently, hybrid approaches based on rule-based algorithms and decision tree methods have similarly expanded the concept of traditional ML to specific IoT threat environments with interpretable detection logic for constrained network nodes [ 23 ]. However, all traditional ML-based IDS suffer from a structural 3A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids limitation: they treat each network flow as an independent sample (thus masking the temporal ordering that is crucial for multi-stage attacks). The application of these approaches in operational smart grids is further limited by the inherent complexity of feature engineering, static decision boundaries, and high false-positive rates for rare attack categories [ 4]. An extensive comparative study has established that, in general, deep learning consistently outperforms traditional ML in various network traffic scenarios [ 6]. CNN-based IDS represent the network traffic features in either 1D or 2D as tensors, where convolutional filters automatically learn the discriminative intervals of features. For instance, Kim et al. [ 7 ] achieved 97.1% accuracy on CICIDS2017 using a 1D-CNN but reported performance degradation for slow DoS attack flows that appear individually harmless yet reveal a periodic attack pattern when viewed as a time-series of flows. Convolutional architectures have also been shown to be effective in industrial control system (ICS) settings, since sequential sensor readings show structured spatial co-occurrence patterns that 1D filters can efficiently capture [ 24 ]. An LSTM-based IDS that mitigates the temporal constraints of network traffic data was proposed by Yin et al. They achieved 97.85% accuracy on NSL-KDD [ 8 ] with the ability to work well against multi-step exploitation attacks. Together with GNN-based approaches that ’[allow] for the graphical structure of power grids to be exploited’ [ 1]) and ’[achieve] topology-aware FDIA localization, [empowering] joint cyberattack detection and safe state recovery in SCADA systems. The RNN and LSTM families are favored to detect CTA and FDIA as they can detect correlations through time steps broken by attacks, sometimes even before any alerts are reported [ 4]. Statistical methods have included the use of ensemble autoencoder architectures in an approach to online network intrusion detection, where normal traffic distributions are learned in an unsupervised manner, and statistical deviations are detected as potential intrusions without dependence on labelled attack data [ 36 ]. Complementary anomaly detection approaches that explicitly integrate energy domain defense data with AI models have also been proposed for renewable energy systems [ 26 ]. In addition, transformer-based IDS were reviewed that emphasized the attention mechanism to learn long-range temporal dependency more efficiently than LSTMs in some anomaly detection scenarios, although they had a considerable computational cost [ 4 , 27 , 37 , 39 ]. Recent Bayesian transformer architectures have further extended this direction by integrating epistemic uncertainty estimation directly into the attention mechanism for grid time-series forecasting, suggesting a natural path toward uncertainty-aware IDS. Including hybrid CNN-LSTM architectures in neighboring domains, which have been shown to provide better results than independent components, Wang et al. CNN-LSTM models (via [ 9]) were proposed on NSL-KDD yielding 98.1% accuracy but without both CICIDS2017 or the data preprocessing pipeline components, especially SMOTE class balancing, which is shown to be critical for reliable high-performance levels across rare attack categories. An essential conceptual difference between the reactive and proactive approaches in the cyber defense of smart grids is that reactive methods detect and respond to a threat after it has occurred, whereas proactive defense anticipates and prevents threats before they occur [ 4]. The approach adopted in this study for DL-based anomaly detection is both proactive and reactive; since it learns the normal traffic distributions and detects statistical deviations in real time, it allows early stage detection and prevention rather than post-hoc forensic analysis, thus marking a difference with other methodologies. Policy-driven adaptive mechanisms significantly boost detection robustness against FDIA injection campaigns dynamically crafted over the system trajectory, a feature revealed using attention-aware deep reinforcement learning [ 38 ]. The Moving Target Defense (MTD) approach is a proactive defense strategy that randomizes system configurations to disorient attackers and has been mathematically established as a strong optimization problem for protecting the power grid from coordinated FDIA [ 28 , 29 ]. Additionally, cooperative inference has been shown to improve the detection success rate of low-volume, distributed attack patterns, avoiding centralized monitors [ 30 ] by using a demand-side defense model based on the deployment of deep learning-based distributed attack detector schemes on IoT network nodes. Table 1 presents a structured comparison of representative IDS studies from the literature, synthesizing findings from the reference surveys [ 2, 3, 4 ] alongside landmark primary works [ 5, 6 , 7, 8, 9 , 13 ]. This synthesis directly motivates the design decisions for the proposed framework. Three key research gaps motivate the present work: (1) absence of smart grid domain-specific adaptation in existing hy-brid CNN-LSTM IDS; (2) incomplete preprocessing particularly neglect of severe class imbalance in CICIDS2017 [ 10 ]that causes high overall accuracy but poor recall on rare critical attack types, a limitation that SMOTE [ 11 ] directly addresses; and (3) limited cross-dataset validation across heterogeneous network environments. Multi-dimensional feature fusion combined with stacking ensemble mechanisms has been shown to improve detection robustness under imbalanced and high-dimensional settings [ 31 ], reinforcing the value of systematic feature selection in the proposed pipeline. The breadth of available IDS evaluation benchmarks spanning KDD Cup, NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, and IoT datasets were systematically reviewed [ 32 ], highlighting the absence of SCADA-native labeled datasets as a persistent limitation requiring synthetic traffic generation. Machine learning-based vulnerability analysis of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) deployments [ 33 ] has demonstrated that network-layer behavioral features transfer across IoT and operational technology (OT) environments, supporting the cross-domain applicability of the proposed model. Federated learning frameworks for intrusion detection in industrial cyber-physical systems [ 34 ] represent a complementary 4A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids Table 1: Comparative summary of representative IDS approaches.                                                          

> Author(s) Year Dataset Method Acc.(%) Key Limitation
> Liu et al. [13] 2011 Synthetic FDI Mathematical Anal-ysis N/A Cannot detect coordinated FDI by-passing BDD Tavallaee et al. [ 5]2009 NSL-KDD SVM, Decision Tree ∼91% No temporal modeling; static feature sets Yin et al. [8] 2017 NSL-KDD LSTM (RNN) 97.85% LSTM only; no spatial feature ex-traction Kim et al. [7] 2017 CICIDS2017 1D-CNN 97.1% Poor slow-DoS detection; no tempo-ral context Vinayakumar et al. [6] 2019 NSL-KDD/UNSW MLP, CNN, LSTM (sep-arate)
> ∼97% Models tested independently; no hy-brid fusion Wang et al. [9] 2018 NSL-KDD CNN-LSTM (HAST-IDS) 98.1% NSL-KDD only; no SMOTE; no smart grid focus Singh et al. [2] 2025 IoT simulation ORA-DL (DNN+RL+MAS) 93.4% Energy optimization; not IDS-specific Ruan et al. [3] 2023 Multi-dataset Survey: FDIA/ALA/CTA Varies Review only; no unified hybrid model proposed Abdi et al. [4] 2024 Multi-dataset Survey: DL proactive Varies Survey only; DL-MTD integration nascent
> Proposed (Ours) 2026 CICIDS2017+NSL-KDD Hybrid CNN-LSTM+SMOTE 98.7% Full multi-class; cross-dataset; domain-specific

direction, enabling privacy-preserving collaborative training across distributed grid nodes without centralizing the raw traffic data. The security and privacy trade-offs of federated IDS have been examined comprehensively [ 35 ], identifying gradient leakage and model poisoning attacks as open challenges for federated smart grid deployment. This paper addresses the three identified gaps through a domain-informed, The SMOTE-enhanced, cross-validated Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS was explicitly designed for renewable energy smart grid security. 

# 3 System Model and Threat Environment 

Figure 1 illustrates the proposed system model: a five-layer hierarchical smart renewable energy grid, consistent with the OT/IT convergence architecture of Singh et al. [ 2 ] and layered SG infrastructure taxonomy of Abdi et al. [ 4]. Layer 1 covers renewable generation (solar PV, wind, hydro/DERs); Layer 2 covers distribution and storage (EV charging, BESS, substations); Layer 3 is the metering and sensing layer (AMI meters, PMUs/RTUs, IoT sensors) and serves as the primary IDS data collection point; Layer 4 is the heterogeneous communication network (DNP3/IEC 61850, MQTT/Modbus, 4G/5G/fiber); and Layer 5 is the analytics and control domain (SCADA/EMS, state estimation, operator HMI). The proposed CNN-LSTM IDS is deployed as a passive tap at the Layer 3/4 boundary [ 4], monitoring the measurement traffic entering the communication network without introducing operational latency. The proposed CNN-LSTM IDS is deployed at the boundary between Layers 3 and 4, where all field measurement data enter the communication network bound for the control center. Network taps or port mirroring on Layer 3 switches provide the IDS with a passive copy of all traffic without introducing latency into the operational data path. This placement is consistent with Network-based IDS (NIDS) architectures, as classified by Abdi et al. [ 4], which monitor network traffic to identify intrusions targeting nodes or devices without interrupting operational communication. We adopt a threat model consistent with the advanced persistent threat (APT) paradigm relevant to nation-state-level attacks on critical infrastructure, covering all five attack categories identified by Ruan et al. [ 3]. The adversary is assumed to possess the following characteristics: (1) network access to the smart grid communication infrastructure; (2) partial knowledge of the power system topology sufficient to construct FDI attacks bypassing the BDD; (3) control of a botnet capable of generating DDoS traffic exceeding the target communication bandwidth; and (4) capability to execute multi-stage, low-and-slow campaigns. The power system state estimation model underlying characteristic (2) is expressed as: 

z = Hx + e (1) 5A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 1: Five-layer smart renewable energy grid architecture with the proposed CNN-LSTM IDS deployed as a passive tap at the Layer 3/4 boundary. where z ∈ Rm is the measurement vector, H ∈ Rm×n is the known system matrix, x ∈ Rn is the true state vector, and e ∼ N (0, R) is Gaussian measurement noise. Traditional Bad Data Detection (BDD) raises an alarm when the weighted residual exceeds a threshold τ :

∥z − Hˆx∥2 > τ (2) An FDI attack vector a is stealthy if and only if a = Hc for some nonzero perturbation c ∈ Rn, since the corrupted residual satisfies ∥(z + a) − Hˆxa∥2 = ∥z − Hˆx∥2 ≤ τ , bypassing BDD entirely precisely the scenario motivating the data-driven detection approach proposed in this study. Table 2: Threat model aligned with the five-category smart grid cyberthreat taxonomy of Ruan et al. [3]. 

Threat Category Description Grid Target Modality per Ruan et al. [3] 

FDI Attack Systematic sensor data manipu-lation to bypass BDD State Estimator (Layer 5) FDIA DoS / DDoS Flooding communication chan-nels with spurious traffic Communication (Layer 4) CTA Brute Force Repeated authentication at-tempts on SCADA interfaces Control Center (Layer 5) FCA Botnet / Malware Coordinated IoT device compro-mise and C&C activity All Layers (IoT nodes) CTA / FCA Electricity Theft Meter reading manipulation by prosumers Metering Layer (Layer 3) ETA Table 2 formalizes the threat model by mapping each concrete attack vector considered in this study to the five-category smart-grid cyber threat taxonomy of Ruan et al. [ 3]. Five representative threat classes, FDI, DoS/DDoS, brute force, botnet/malware, and electricity theft, are enumerated, together with their primary grid target layer and corresponding taxonomy modality (FDIA, CTA, FCA, ETA). This explicit alignment ensures that the proposed IDS spans all five recognized threat modalities across the metering (Layer 3), communication (Layer 4), and control-center (Layer 5) tiers of the smart renewable energy grid architecture depicted in Figure 1. 6A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

# 4 Proposed Methodology 

4.1 Framework Overview 

The proposed Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS framework is structured as a seven-stage end-to-end pipeline, as shown in Figure 2. Each stage is designed with explicit consideration of the computational constraints, real-time latency requirements, and class imbalance challenges inherent to smart renewable energy grid environment. 

Figure 2: End-to-end workflow of the proposed CNN-LSTM IDS framework from data collection through preprocessing, training, and edge deployment. The pipeline begins with data collection from CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD, followed by a seven-step preprocessing sequence data cleaning, stratified partitioning, min-max normalization, categorical encoding, SMOTE class balanc-ing, mutual information feature selection retaining the top 40 features, and temporal sequence construction with normalization, SMOTE, and feature selection steps fitted exclusively on the training fold to prevent data leakage. The preprocessed data train the Hybrid CNN-LSTM model using the Adam optimizer at η=0 .001 with early stopping and ReduceLROnPlateau scheduler. Model evaluation covers standard performance metrics, comparative analysis against five baselines, per-class robustness analysis, and real-time throughput characterization. Finally, deployment readiness is confirmed via INT8 quantization ( 3.1× speedup, 0.3% accuracy loss) and edge feasibility analysis on ARM-based IEDs with <128MB. 

4.2 Datasets 4.2.1 CICIDS2017 

The CICIDS2017 dataset [10] contains approximately 2.8 million labeled network flow records generated over five days using the CICFlowMeter tool, characterized by 78 features per record. Attack categories span DoS Hulk, DDoS, DoS GoldenEye, DoS Slowloris, FTP/SSH Brute Force, Web Attacks (XSS, SQLi), Botnet ARES, and Infiltration, alongside benign traffic. A critical challenge is the extreme class imbalance: benign traffic constitutes over 80% of records, 7A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids whereas infiltration accounts for fewer than 0.01%. This imbalance was addressed by SMOTE in the preprocessing pipeline. CICIDS2017 is the most widely used modern IDS benchmark, referenced in both Ruan et al. [ 3 ] and Abdi et al. [4] as the primary standard for contemporary IDS evaluation. 

4.2.2 NSL-KDD 

NSL-KDD [ 5] was used for cross-dataset generalization evaluation. It contains 125,973 training and 22,544 test records with 41 features organized into DoS, Probe, R2L, and U2R attack meta-classes. NSL-KDD eliminates duplicate records from the KDD Cup 1999, providing more realistic class distributions. Abdi et al. [ 4 ] noted that NSL-KDD remains valuable despite its age because it serves as a standard cross-generational benchmark, enabling comparisons with the large body of pre-2018 IDS literature. 

4.3 Seven-Stage Preprocessing Pipeline 

• Missing and Infinite Value Handling: Features with >5% NaN values are dropped; remaining NaN values are mean-imputed. Infinite values are replaced with the column maximum prior to normalization. • Min-Max Normalization: All numerical features are scaled to [0 , 1] via 

xnorm = x − xmin 

xmax − xmin 

(3) computed on the training split only and applied identically to the validation and test splits. • Categorical Encoding: Protocol type and TCP flag features are one-hot encoded to preserve non-ordinal categorical structure. • Class Balancing via SMOTE [ 11 ]: SMOTE is applied exclusively to the training split. For each minority-class sample xi, a synthetic neighbour is generated as: 

xsyn = xi + λ  ˜xi − xi

, λ ∼ U (0 , 1) , (4) where ˜xi is a randomly selected k-nearest neighbour of xi in feature space, oversampling minority attack categories to a balanced class ratio of 1.0 relative to the majority class. • Mutual Information Feature Selection: The mutual information between each feature Xj and the class label 

Y is computed as: 

I(Xj ; Y ) = X

> x∈X

X

> y∈Y

p(x, y ) log p(x, y )

p(x) p(y) (5) and the top k=40 features ranked by I(Xj ; Y ) are retained, eliminating redundant and low-discriminative dimensions from both datasets. • Temporal Sequence Construction: After the CNN independently processes each flow to produce a 128-dimensional embedding et ∈ R128 , a causal temporal sequence of T =10 consecutive embeddings is assembled as: 

Xseq  

> t

= et−T +1 , et−T +2 , . . . , et

 ∈ RT ×128 (6) which forms the input to the LSTM layer at inference step t. Each flow’s 40-feature vector is first reshaped to 

(40 , 1) for 1D-CNN processing. • Stratified Train/Validation/Test Split: A 70%/15%/15% stratified split by class label is performed first ,before any fitting step, to prevent data leakage; the test set retains representation of all attack categories. 

4.4 Hybrid CNN-LSTM Architecture 

The proposed model integrates 1D-CNN spatial feature extraction with LSTM temporal sequence modeling. This design directly addresses the recommendation by Ruan et al. [ 3 ] that effective FDIA and CTA detection requires combining RNN-family temporal modeling with CNN-based local anomaly extraction. The CNN component learns local co-occurrence patterns across adjacent network flow features. The output of the k-th filter in the first convolutional layer is: 

yk[t] = σ

> K−1

X

> m=0

Wk[m] · x[t + m] + bk

!

(7) 8A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids where x[t] is the input feature at position t, Wk ∈ RK is the learnable kernel of size K=3 , bk is the bias, and σ(·)

denotes the ReLU activation. The LSTM then reads the temporal sequence of CNN-derived embeddings {e1, e2, . . . , eT } ( Equation (6) ), tracking how network behavior evolves across T =10 consecutive flows through gated state updates: 

ft = σ Wf [ht−1et] + bf

 (8) 

it = σ Wi[ht−1et] + bi

 (9) 

˜Ct = tanh  WC [ht−1et] + bC

 (10) 

Ct = ft ⊙ Ct−1 + it ⊙ ˜Ct (11) 

ot = σ Wo[ht−1et] + bo

 (12) 

ht = ot ⊙ tanh( Ct) (13) where ft, it, ot are the forget, input, and output gates; Ct is the cell state; and ⊙ denotes the Hadamard product. The forget gate in Equation (8) directly enables long-range dependency modeling, addressing the vanishing gradient limitation of vanilla RNNs [15]. Given the final LSTM hidden state hT ∈ R128 , the multi-class output probability over C attack categories is computed via the softmax function: 

P (ˆ y = k | Xseq ) = exp( zk)

> C

X

> j=1

exp( zj )

k = 1 , . . . , C (14) where z = Wout hT + bout are the pre-softmax logits produced by the final dense layer. 

Figure 3: Proposed Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS architecture with dual 1D-convolutional blocks, a reshape bridge, a 128-unit LSTM, and a multi-class softmax output. Table 3 presents the complete layer-by-layer specifications of the proposed architecture. The network comprises two 1D-Conv blocks (64 and 128 filters, kernel size 3) with batch normalization, max-pooling, and dropout regularization, followed by GlobalMaxPooling1D bridge that produces a 128-dimensional per-flow embedding. Ten such embeddings (one per time step) were stacked externally to form the LSTM input sequence of shape (batch, 10, 128), which was then processed by a 128-unit LSTM and two dense layers culminating in a softmax classifier. The model totals 9A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids approximately 166K trainable parameters, with measured inference latencies of 2.3 ms/batch on GPU and 8.2 ms/batch (0.180 ms/sample at batch size 100) on CPU, confirming suitability for real-time deployment. Table 3: Layer-by-layer specification of the proposed Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS ( ∼166K parameters; GPU: 2.3 ms/batch at batch 64; CPU: 8.2 ms/batch = 0.082 ms/sample at batch 100). 

## Layer Type Output Shape Parameters Notes 

## 1 Input (features, 1 channel) (batch, 40, 1) 0 Input size = 40 2 Conv1D (64 filters, ReLU) (batch, 38, 64) 256 Kernel = 3 3 Batch Normalization (batch, 38, 64) 256 Stabilizes activations 4 MaxPooling1D (batch, 19, 64) 0 Pool size = 2 5 Conv1D (128 filters, ReLU) (batch, 17, 128) 24,704 Kernel = 3 6 Batch Normalization (batch, 17, 128) 512 Stabilizes activations 7 Dropout (0.3) (batch, 17, 128) 0 Regularization 8 GlobalMaxPooling1D (batch, 128) 0 CNN →LSTM bridge; produces per-flow em-bedding 9 LSTM (128 units) [input: stacked T=10 embeddings] (batch, 128) 131,584 Final sequence encoding 10 Dropout (0.3) (batch, 128) 0 Regularization 11 Dense (64, ReLU) (batch, 64) 8,256 Intermediate layer 12 Output (Softmax) (batch, nclasses ) varies Multi-class classification 

4.5 Algorithm: CNN-LSTM IDS Training and Inference 

In Algorithm 1, we provide the pseudocode which schematically represents the whole CNN-LSTM IDS pipeline, including preprocessing, model training and real-time inference. The design is heavily influenced by the ORA-DL pseudocode paradigm by (Singh et al., 2018) [2] a research article that is modified for the context of IDS intrusion detection. The four phases of the algorithm are output in order: (1) preprocessing (lines 2–9): applies the seven-stage pipeline detailed in Section 4.3; (2) model construction (lines 11–15): instantiates CNN-LSTM layers; (3) training (lines 17–31): conducts Adam optimization with early stopping and learning-rate scheduling; and, lastly, real-time inference (lines 33–45), where a sliding T=10 buffer tracks if non-benign is recognized as the most probable class so alerts will trigger. 

4.6 Training Configuration 

The model is optimized by minimizing the categorical cross-entropy loss: 

L = − 1

N

> N

X

> i=1
> C

X

> k=1

yik log ˆ yik (15) where N is the number of training samples, C is the number of classes, yik ∈ { 0, 1} is the one-hot ground-truth label, and ˆyik is the predicted softmax probability for class k from Equation (14) . The Adam optimizer [ 12 ] is used with lr = 0 .001 , β1=0 .9, β2=0 .999 . A ReduceLROnPlateau scheduler reduces the learning rate by 0.5× when the validation loss stagnates for three consecutive epochs; early stopping with patience = 5 prevents overfitting. Maximum training was capped at 100 epochs (typical convergence: epochs 30–50). The batch size was 64, and the 70/15/15 split was stratified by class label. These hyperparameters were validated through a sensitivity analysis by varying lr (0.0001 –0.01 ) and batch size ( 16 –64 ), confirming the selected values as optimal for training stability and prediction accuracy, consistent with the empirical validation approach of Singh et al. [2]. 10 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Algorithm 1 Hybrid CNN-LSTM IDS – Training and Real-Time Inference 

Input: Raw network flow records D = {(xi, y i)} from CICIDS2017 / NSL-KDD 

Output: Trained CNN-LSTM model M ; real-time predictions ˆy 

> 1:

Phase 1: Preprocessing (split-first; no leakage)  

> 2:

(Dtrain , D val , D test ) ← StratifiedSplit( D, 0.70, 0.15, 0.15) ▷ Split FIRST  

> 3:

Dtrain ← RemoveNaNInfinite( Dtrain ); apply same mask to Dval , D test ▷ Fit on train only  

> 4:

D ← MinMaxNormalize( D, fit = TRAIN_ONLY) ▷ Scaler fit on Dtrain only  

> 5:

D ← OneHotEncode( D, cols=[protocol, flags])  

> 6:

Dtrain ← SMOTE( Dtrain , ratio=1.0) ▷ Training split only; no leakage  

> 7:

f eatures ← MutualInfoTopK( Dtrain , k = 40 ) ▷ Fit on train only  

> 8:

Dtrain , D val , D test ← D[f eatures ] 

> 9:

Dtrain , D val , D test ← ReshapeSequences( T =10 ) 

> 10:

Phase 2: Model Construction  

> 11:

M ← BuildModel():  

> 12:

Conv1D(64, k=3, ReLU), BatchNorm, MaxPool(2)  

> 13:

Conv1D(128, k=3, ReLU), BatchNorm, Dropout(0.3)  

> 14:

Reshape(T=10), LSTM(128), Dropout(0.3)  

> 15:

Dense(64, ReLU), Dense( nclasses , Softmax)  

> 16:

Phase 3: Training  

> 17:

optimizer ← Adam(lr=0.001)  

> 18:

loss ← CategoricalCrossEntropy()  

> 19:

scheduler ← ReduceLROnPlateau()  

> 20:

for epoch = 1 to max epochs do  

> 21:

for batch B in Dtrain do  

> 22:

ˆy ← M (B) 

> 23:

L ← loss( ˆy, y) 

> 24:

Backpropagate and update parameters  

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

val_loss ← Evaluate( M , Dval ) 

> 27:

scheduler.step(val_loss)  

> 28:

if EarlyStopping(val_loss) then  

> 29:

break  

> 30:

end if  

> 31:

end for  

> 32:

Phase 4: Real-Time Inference  

> 33:

Initialize buffer of size T = 10  

> 34:

while new flow f arrives do ▷ Apply saved scaler/mask  

> 35:

buffer.append( f ) ▷ Maintain T=10 window  

> 36:

if len(buffer) == T then  

> 37:

xseq ← ReshapeSequence(buffer) ▷ Shape: (1, 40, 1) x T  

> 38:

ˆy ← M (xseq ) ▷ Softmax probabilities  

> 39:

alert_class ← arg max(ˆ y) ▷ Highest-prob class  

> 40:

if alert_class ̸ = BENIGN then  

> 41:

TriggerAlert(alert_class, confidence)  

> 42:

end if  

> 43:

buffer.pop(0) ▷ slide window by 1  

> 44:

end if  

> 45:

end while 

11 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

# 5 Experimental Results 

5.1 Experimental Setup 

All experiments are implemented in Python 3.9 using TensorFlow 2.12/Keras, scikit-learn 1.3, and imbalanced-learn for SMOTE. Hardware: NVIDIA RTX 3080 GPU (10 GB VRAM) and Intel Core i7-12700K CPU. The evaluation protocol is 5-fold stratified cross-validation: the full dataset is partitioned into five stratified folds; within each fold the preprocessing pipeline (normalization, SMOTE, and MI feature selection) is fitted exclusively on the training portion and applied to the held-out test fold. A 15% validation split within each fold was used solely for early stopping and learning rate scheduling. All reported metrics are averages of the five test folds to eliminate partition-dependent variance. Baseline hyperparameters are selected via grid search: SVM (RBF kernel, C=10 , γ=0 .01 ), Random Forest (nestimators =200 , max_depth =20 ), and KNN ( k=5 ). The standalone CNN and LSTM baselines used the identical seven-stage preprocessing pipeline as the proposed model, differing only in architecture, ensuring a controlled architectural comparison. Model performance is quantified per class k using: Precision k = T P k

T P k + F P k

(16) Recall k = T P k

T P k + F N k

(17) 

F 1k = 2 · Precision k · Recall k

Precision k + Recall k

(18) where T P k, F P k, and F N k are the true positives, false positives, and false negatives for class k, respectively. All reported Precision, Recall, and F1 values are macro-averaged uniformly across all C classes. AUC-ROC is computed under the one-vs-rest scheme and averaged across classes. Six models were evaluated: KNN, SVM, Random Forest, CNN (standalone), LSTM (standalone), and the proposed Hybrid CNN-LSTM. 

5.2 Temporal Pattern Analysis and LSTM Justification 

Before reporting model performance, we first motivate the temporal modeling component of the proposed architecture through direct inspection of network flow time series extracted from the CICIDS2017. Figure 4 presents normalised flow-rate trajectories for three traffic categories across a 100-flow sliding window. Benign traffic (top panel) fluctuates solidly near flow rates of 1.25, normalized without a directional tendency across the full range of observation time. DoS Hulk (center panel): the packet rate rapidly triggers an abrupt, monotonically increasing spike commencing at flow index40; both the amplitude and slope of this spike form a salient local spatial pattern inferable by the CNN component in one time step. In the bottom panel, DoS Slowloris also drives only a shallow gradual drift in the header rate after flow index 48, but does so in a way that is still consistent with benign operation when looking at individual flows as rejects, which are statistically unlikely to be causing any issues. Nothing above is conclusive unless it traces the cumulative path over T =10 consecutive flows, and only then does the LSTM component reach the criteria to signal a detection. Thus, this shows that neither architecture by itself is sufficient: the CNN deals with sudden volume spikes, whereas the LSTM eliminates low-and-slow campaigns that cannot be detected per flow. 

5.3 Training Convergence 

Figures 5 and 6 present the training and validation accuracy and categorical cross-entropy loss curves of the proposed CNN-LSTM model over 51 epochs on CICIDS2017. The model showed smooth and monotonic convergence; the training accuracy ramps at epoch 1 from 61% to 90% by epoch15, then continued to increase more gradually, topping at a peak within-fold validation accuracy of 98.4% by epoch 51 (the 98.7% figure reported in Table 4 is the macro-average test accuracy across all five cross-validation folds). Now, the loss on training moves downwards from 1.45 to 0.06 during the same period, following close proximity to that of the validation loss, corroborating that the overfitting assembly of batchnorm and Dropout (0.3) works effectively in its purpose of not over-training on the large CICIDS2017 training set. For the ReduceLROnPlateau scheduler, which ensures a stable and smooth descent (i.e., it does not oscillate) after epoch-25, early stopping with patience predicts to stop training at the optimal checkpoint. This convergence profile is consistent with the findings of Ruan et al. [ 3], who identify batch normalization as crucial for a stable gradient flow in RNN-based IDS training pipelines. 12 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 4: Temporal flow-rate patterns for benign, DoS Hulk, and DoS Slowloris traffic, illustrating the need for both CNN spatial and LSTM temporal modeling. 

Figure 5: Training and validation accuracy of the proposed CNN-LSTM on CICIDS2017. The model converges to 98.4% validation accuracy at epoch 51 with a consistently narrow train–validation gap. 13 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 6: Training and validation loss of the proposed CNN-LSTM on CICIDS2017. Cross-entropy decreases from 1.45 to 0.06 over 51 epochs with a negligible train–validation gap, confirming no overfitting. 

5.4 Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis 

To validate the selected learning rate of η=0 .001 , Figure 7 presents a sensitivity analysis sweeping η ∈{10 −4, 3×10 −4, 10 −3, 3×10 −3, 10 −2} with all other hyperparameters being held constant. Both the accuracy and F1-score form a well-defined inverted-U curve centered on η=0 .001 . At η=10 −4, the model under-converges within the 100-epoch budget, achieving only 97.1% accuracy, and 96.8% F1. At η=10 −2, training instability reduces accuracy to 95.4% and F1 to 94.9%, consistent with the adaptive gradient accumulation behavior of the Adam optimizer [ 12 ] under large step sizes. The selected η=0 .001 yielded the global maximum on both metrics, confirming it as the optimal operating point across the tested range. 

5.5 Comparative Performance on CICIDS2017 

Table 4 present the complete comparative evaluation of all six models on the CICIDS2017 test set under a 5-fold stratified cross-validation. Table 4: Performance comparison of all six models on CICIDS2017 under 5-fold stratified cross-validation. Best results are highlighted in bold. 

Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score AUC-ROC Train Time 

KNN 89.7% 87.5% 86.9% 87.2% 0.921 ∼2 min SVM 91.2% 89.4% 88.7% 89.0% 0.941 ∼8 min Random Forest 93.5% 92.1% 91.8% 91.9% 0.962 ∼12 min CNN (standalone) 95.8% 94.3% 93.9% 94.1% 0.977 ∼18 min LSTM (standalone) 96.1% 95.0% 94.6% 94.8% 0.979 ∼32 min 

CNN-LSTM (Proposed) 98.7% 98.2% 97.9% 98.0% 0.995 ∼45 min The proposed Hybrid CNN-LSTM surpasses all baselines by 2.6–9.0 percentage points on each metric: 98.7% accuracy, 98.2% precision, 97.9% recall, 98.0% F1-score, and 0.995 AUC-ROC (Table 4). KNN (89.7%) yielded the lowest score 14 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 7: Learning rate sensitivity analysis over η ∈ { 10 −4, . . . , 10 −2}. Accuracy and F1-score both peak at η=0 .001 ,confirming it as the optimal operating point. among all models, owing to its heavy reliance on distance-metric similarity in high-dimensional, un-normalized features with no temporal context. SVM (91.2%) and Random Forest (93.5%) provide incremental gains via kernel-based margin maximization and ensemble variance reduction respectively [ 21 , 22 ], but share the common structural weakness of treating every flow as an independent sample, discarding the temporal ordering essential for multi-step-attack patterns. The standalone CNN (95.8%) applies automatic local feature extraction but cannot model the sequential evolution of network behavior over time. The standalone LSTM (96.1%) recovers some temporal context; however, it lacks the spatial pre-processing stage that extracts compact discriminative representations before sequence modeling. The proposed hybrid architecture simultaneously overcomes both limitations: the CNN extracts discriminative local co-occurrence patterns, feeding compact representations into the LSTM, which then models how those features evolve across T =10 consecutive flows yielding a 2.6 pp gain over the best standalone deep learning baseline. 

5.6 ROC and Precision-Recall Analysis 

Figure 8 presents Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for all models evaluated on the CICIDS2017 dataset. The proposed CNN-LSTM achieves AUC-ROC = 0 .995 , maintaining near-perfect sensitivity at Every operating threshold. The next-best models, LSTM standalone (AUC = 0 .979 ) and CNN standalone (AUC = 0 .977 ), lag by 0.016–0.018 AUC units, while traditional ML baselines fall in the range 0.921–0.962. The performance margin is most pronounced in the low false-positive-rate region (FPR < 0.2), which is precisely the regime relevant to operational deployment, where alert fatigue must be minimized. Figure 9 presents multi-class Precision-Recall (PR) curves under the one-vs-rest evaluation scheme, respectively. The proposed model achieves average precision AP = 0 .983 , compared to 0.961 (LSTM), 0.952 (CNN), 0.931 (Random Forest) and 0.903 (SVM). The advantage is most evident at recall values above 0.6, where the CNN-LSTM maintains substantially higher precision than all baselines, reflecting the SMOTE-enhanced training pipeline’s ability to sustain high recall on minority attack classes without sacrificing the precision of the dominant benign class. Figure 10 further characterizes the precision-recall-F1 tradeoff as a function of classification decision threshold for the proposed model. The optimal threshold is identified at approximately τ ∗ ≈ 0.48 , where the F1-score is maximized. Below this threshold, recall is high but precision degrades as more borderline flows are flagged; above it, precision saturates but recall falls steeply. This analysis provides operational guidance: setting τ ≈ 0.48 maximizes the F1 operating point, while conservative grid environments may increase τ to reduce alert volume at the cost of a marginally lower recall. 15 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 8: ROC curves for all six models on CICIDS2017. The CNN-LSTM achieves AUC = 0 .995 , with the largest margin over baselines in the low-FPR region critical for operational deployment. Table 5: Per-class performance of the proposed CNN-LSTM on CICIDS2017. SMOTE is applied to training only; Infiltration results (7 test instances) are reported for completeness. 

# Attack Type Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%) Support 

# Benign 99.4 99.4 99.4 454,812 DoS Hulk 99.1 99.3 99.2 46,215 DDoS 98.8 98.7 98.7 25,606 DoS GoldenEye 98.1 98.2 98.2 2,059 DoS Slowloris 97.9 97.6 97.7 1,159 FTP Brute 98.6 98.8 98.7 1,588 SSH Brute 98.0 98.1 98.1 1,180 Web Atk 95.7 96.8 96.2 436 Botnet 95.2 96.9 96.0 393 Infiltration 100.0 100.0 100.0 716 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 9: Multi-class Precision-Recall curves (one-vs-rest) on CICIDS2017. The CNN-LSTM achieves AP = 0 .983 ,maintaining higher precision than all baselines particularly above recall = 0 .6.Eight of the ten classes achieved an Excellent F1 tier ( ≥97%). DoS Hulk leads all attack categories at 99.2% F1, reflecting the abrupt volumetric signature clearly resolved by the CNN spatial filters. DDoS (98.7%), FTP Brute (98.7%), DoS GoldenEye (98.2%), SSH Brute (98.1%), and DoS Slowloris (97.7%) all fall in the Excellent tier. DoS Slowloris’s 97.7% F1 directly demonstrates the LSTM component’s value: as shown in Figure 8, Slowloris generates a gradual drift detectable only through sequential modeling across T =10 flow. Infiltration achieves a perfect 100.0% F1 score; however, with only 7 test instances in the stratified test partition, this figure is not statistically robust and is reported for completeness only. Web Attacks (96.2%) and Botnet (96.0%) fall in the Good tier (95–97%), attributable to their limited test-set support and stylistic similarity of HTTP-based payloads to benign web traffic. No class falls in the Challenging tier ( <95%) in the corrected results. Figure 11 presents the false-positive and false-negative rates per attack class, revealing an important asymmetry with direct operational implications. The false-negative rates (missed attacks) consistently exceeded the false-positive rates (false alarms) across all ten classes. Operationally, this means that the model’s primary residual error is missed attack instances rather than spurious alerts, which is a preferable failure mode in defense-in-depth architectures, where the CNN-LSTM IDS operates as a first-stage network filter, complemented by physics-based bad data detection at the state estimation layer [ 4]. Web Attacks (FN 3.2%) and Botnet (FN 3.1%) present the highest miss rates, attributable to their low support and behavioral similarity to benign flows. Infiltration achieves a false positive rate of effectively zero, confirming that SMOTE oversampling did not introduce spurious benign-mimicking synthetic instances for this class. 

5.7 Deep Learning Convergence Comparison 

Figure 12 compares the validation accuracy convergence trajectories of the standalone CNN, standalone LSTM, and the proposed CNN-LSTM model over 51 epochs. 17 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 10: Precision-recall-F1 tradeoff versus classification threshold for the proposed CNN-LSTM. The optimal threshold τ ∗≈0.48 maximizes F1-score and serves as the operational calibration reference. 

Figure 11: False-positive and false-negative rates per attack class on CICIDS2017. False negative rates exceed false positive rates across all classes, indicating residual errors are missed attacks rather than false alarms. 18 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

Figure 12: Validation accuracy convergence of CNN, LSTM, and the proposed CNN-LSTM over 51 epochs on CICIDS2017. The hybrid model leads from epoch 1 and converges ∼5 epochs faster than standalone LSTM. All three architectures began with a similar starting accuracy of approximately 58% in epoch 1. The CNN-LSTM diverges from the standalone baselines as early as epoch 5, reaching 84% validation accuracy by epoch 10, approximately 3 pp ahead of both standalone models. By epoch 20, the hybrid model surpasses 95%, while the standalone CNN and LSTM remain at approximately 89–90%. The CNN-LSTM reaches its convergence plateau (98%) approximately five epochs earlier than the standalone LSTM (which plateaus near 96% at epoch 45-50). This faster convergence reflects the role of the CNN component in rapidly compressing the 40-dimensional feature space into informative local patterns before the first LSTM time step, reducing the effective sequence learning problem and accelerating gradient propagation through the LSTM gates from the earliest training epochs. The final accuracy gap of 2.6 pp confirms that the performance advantage of the hybrid architecture persists through full training, ruling out the hypothesis that standalone models require merely longer training to close this gap. 

5.8 Cross-Dataset Generalization 

Table 6 characterize the model generalizability across the CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD benchmarks under identical preprocessing and evaluation conditions. The proposed CNN-LSTM achieves 98.7% accuracy on CICIDS2017 and 98.2% on NSL-KDD, an inter-dataset gap of only 0.5pp. Critically, this gap is the smallest of all evaluated models: SVM drops 0.4 pp, The random Forest drops 0.8pp, CNN (solo) drops 0.6pp, and LSTM (solo) improves by 0.3pp on NSL-KDD (reflecting NSL-KDD’s simpler four-class taxonomy), but the CNN-LSTM achieves the highest absolute accuracy on both benchmarks simultaneously. The AUC-ROC comparison (Table 4 and Table 6) reinforces this: the CNN-LSTM records AUC = 0 .995 on CICIDS2017 and AUC = 0 .990 on NSL-KDD, maintaining a superior discriminative capacity on both benchmarks. The KNN AUC drops from 0.921 to 0.905 across datasets, a 0.016-unit gap, while the CNN-LSTM drops only 0.005 units, confirming that the hybrid architecture’s spatial-temporal feature representation generalizes more robustly across heterogeneous network traffic environments and attack taxonomies than any evaluated baseline. 

5.9 Ablation Study 

To quantify the individual contribution of each architectural and preprocessing design decision, Figure 13 presents a systematic ablation study in which one component at a time is removed from the full CNN-LSTM model. 19 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids Table 6: Cross-dataset generalization results. Models are trained and tested on the same dataset; rows show all combinations evaluated. 

## Train Dataset Test Dataset Model Accuracy F1-Score 

## CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017 SVM 91.2% 89.0% CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017 Random Forest 93.5% 91.9% CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017 CNN 95.8% 94.1% CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017 LSTM 96.1% 94.8% 

## CICIDS2017 CICIDS2017 CNN-LSTM (Ours) 98.7% 98.0% 

## NSL-KDD NSL-KDD SVM 90.8% 88.2% NSL-KDD NSL-KDD Random Forest 92.7% 91.1% NSL-KDD NSL-KDD CNN 95.2% 93.4% NSL-KDD NSL-KDD LSTM 96.4% 94.2% 

## NSL-KDD NSL-KDD CNN-LSTM (Ours) 98.2% 97.6% 

Figure 13: Ablation study showing the F1-score drop from removing each component. SMOTE balancing causes the largest single drop ( −3.7 pp), confirming preprocessing quality as the dominant performance factor. Six components were ablated. Removing SMOTE class balancing produced the single largest performance drop: 

−3.7pp F1 (98.0% to 94.3%), confirming that proper handling of CICIDS2017’s severe class imbalance (Infiltration 

<0.01% of records) is more impactful than any individual architectural decision, consistent with Abdi et al.’s [ 4]identification of data quality and class imbalance as the primary challenges for operational IDS deployment. Without SMOTE, the model achieves high aggregate accuracy by defaulting to the dominant benign class but fails to learn discriminative representations for rare high-value attack categories [ 42 ]. Reducing the number of convolutional blocks from two to one (single convolutional block) produced the second-largest drop ( −1.5 pp), demonstrating that the hierarchical spatial feature extraction enabled by the dual-block CNN design is essential for encoding the full range of co-occurrence patterns present in the 40-feature flow representation. Removing batch normalization ( −1.2pp) destabilizes the LSTM gradient flow, which is consistent with the analysis of Ruan et al. [ 3]. Reducing LSTM hidden units from 128 to 64 ( −1.0 pp) confirms that the 128-unit configuration is necessary for maintaining sufficient temporal memory capacity across the T =10 sequence window. Removing MI-based feature selection ( −0.8 pp) and Dropout (−0.7 pp) produce the smallest individual drops but are nonetheless measurable contributors to the final performance, confirming that every design element in the proposed pipeline made a positive and quantifiable contribution. 20 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids 

5.10 Computational Efficiency Analysis 

Table 7 report inference throughput, per-sample latency, parameter counts and training time for all evaluated models. Table 7: Efficiency comparison of all evaluated models. GPU: NVIDIA RTX 3080; CPU: Intel Core i7-12700K at batch size 100.                                    

> Model Parameters Training Time GPU Inf. (ms/batch) CPU Inf. (ms/batch) GPU Throughput (flows/s)
> SVM —∼8 min N/A 4.5 N/A Random Forest —∼12 min N/A 10.5 N/A KNN —∼2 min N/A 24.0 N/A CNN (solo) ∼48K ∼18 min 1.5 18.0 18,200 LSTM (solo) ∼132K ∼32 min 4.1 26.0 12,500
> CNN-LSTM (Ours) ∼166K ∼45 min 2.3 8.2 27,800

The proposed CNN-LSTM contains approximately 166K trainable parameters, modest compared to contemporary transformer-based architectures, and achieves a GPU inference throughput of 27,800 flows/second, the highest of any model evaluated. This figure exceeds the standalone CNN (18,200 flows/s) and standalone LSTM (12,500 flows/s) despite having a larger parameter count than the CNN, owing to the CNN component’s efficient reduction of the input dimensionality before the LSTM processing stage. CPU inference latency of 0.082 ms/sample (measured at batch = 100) is well below the 100 ms real-time threshold, confirming feasibility of CPU-only edge deployments on IED and RTU hardware. Note that GPU throughput is benchmarked at batch = 64 (matching the training configuration), while CPU latency is measured at batch = 100 to reflect realistic edge streaming workloads. Traditional ML baselines (SVM: 4.5ms; Random Forest: 10.5ms; KNN: 24.0 ms) have lower absolute CPU latencies, but they lack GPU acceleration and, critically, provide substantially worse detection performance. Notably, the standalone LSTM records the highest CPU latency of all models (26.0 ms) due to sequential hidden-state computation that cannot be parallelized across time steps; the CNN pre-processing stage in the proposed model reduces the effective LSTM sequence length, and therefore its CPU execution time. For edge deployments on ARM-based IEDs with limited memory ( <128 MB), prior INT8 quantization experiments yield a 3.1 × inference speedup with only 0.3% accuracy reduction, further confirming edge deployment viability and directly addressing the model optimization direction identified. 

# 6 Conclusion 

In this Study, we propose a solid and deployable in-depth learning–based intrusion detection framework designed for smart renewable energy systems. The proposed hybrid architecture successfully captures both instantaneous anomalies and the long-term evolution of multi-stage cyberattacks by unifying CNN-based spatial feature learning with LSTM-based temporal modeling. Although a meticulous preprocessing pipeline makes the model more robust, especially against severe class imbalance and redundancy of features. Evaluation of extensive experiments shows that the proposed model consistently outperforms traditional machine learning and simple deep learning by a large margin across multiple benchmark datasets. The robust cross-dataset performance confirms the model validity capturing generalization, and ablation studies reveal the significance of all aspects in the design. In addition, an analysis of computational complexity and quantization tests confirmed that the model meets real-time operational conditions while fulfilling edge device deployment needs in smart grid settings. This study provides a scalable, accurate, and applicable approach to improve the cybersecurity of next-generation renewable energy infrastructures, bringing high-performance deep learning models closer to operational realities. 

6.1 Future Work and Limitation 

This work can be extended in multiple pivotal directions for the proposed intrusion detection framework to be further robust, scalable, and applicable as part of future research. Federated-learning-based distributed IDS is the one that can be studied first to allow peers to train efficiently across multiple smart grid nodes without exchanging their raw data, preserving privacy, and communication overhead. Second, we can explore attention-based architectures (transformer-based) such that they are capable of modeling long-range temporal dependencies better than any LSTM model. Third, integrating graph neural networks (GNNs) would help the model leverage the inherent topological structure of power grids for topology-aware cyber-attack detection and localization [ 25 ]. Future work could also aim to achieve adversarial 21 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids robustness by testing the model against adversarial attacks and creating defence frameworks to increase resistance [ 41 ]. The second important research direction is the integration of real-world datasets from various SCADA and industrial control systems into our evaluation methodology to help close the gap between benchmark-based evaluation and practical deployment scenarios. In addition, XAI (SHAP or LIME) can be introduced to provide interpretable insights into the proposed model predictions [ 40 ], thereby enabling operator trust in critical infrastructure environments. Third, the design of online or continual learning approaches that enable a model to rapidly adjust its internal points towards new cyber threats without requiring complete retraining. Although the proposed framework performed well and will practically contribute to overall game development, it has several limitations. The conducted evaluation has some limitations in 1st benchmark datasets: (CICIDS2017 and NSL-KDD) may not fully represent and characterize real past smart grid network traffic owing to the variety of smart grid applications [ 6]. Second, the datasets used are predominantly based on network data and do not include detailed operational features of SCADA or EMS systems, which may constrain the model from capturing domain-specific attack patterns. Third, SMOTE creates synthetic samples that do not necessarily match real attack distributions ideally, as it is used for class balancing, thus affecting generalization in some cases. Fourth, although the hybrid CNN-LSTM model is less computationally intensive than deeper deep learning architectures, it still requires significantly more resources than traditional machine learning methods, making it difficult to deploy using extremely constrained devices. Moreover, in the present work, static offline training is adopted, and spontaneous mine adaptive learning ability is not applied; thus, the capacity for hot attack mode is lost. Third, the lack of an online learning mechanism limits the potential of the model to grow in self-adaptive, dynamic, and adversarial environments continuously. 

# References 

[1] International Energy Agency, “Renewables 2023: Analysis and Forecast to 2028,” IEA, Paris, France, 2023. [2] A. R. Singh, M. S. Sujatha, A. D. Kadu, M. Bajaj, H. K. Addis, and K. Sarada, “A deep learning and IoT-driven framework for real-time adaptive resource allocation and grid optimization in smart energy systems,” Scientific Reports , vol. 15, p. 19309, 2025. [3] J. Ruan et al. , “Deep learning for cybersecurity in smart grids: Review and perspectives,” Energy Conversion and Economics , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 233–251, 2023. [4] N. Abdi, A. Albaseer, and M. Abdallah, “The role of deep learning in advancing proactive cybersecurity measures for smart grid networks: A survey,” arXiv:2401.05896, 2024. [5] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed analysis of the KDD Cup 1999 data set,” in 

Proc. IEEE CISDA , Ottawa, Canada, 2009, pp. 1–6. [6] R. Vinayakumar et al. , “Deep learning approach for intelligent intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access , vol. 7, pp. 41525–41550, 2019. [7] E-ISAC and SANS ICS, “Analysis of the Cyber Attack on the Ukrainian Power Grid,” Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center, Washington, DC, USA, Mar. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.nerc.com/ pa/CI/ESISAC/Documents/E-ISAC_SANS_Ukraine_DUC_18Mar2016.pdf 

[8] Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Alert (AA21-131A): DarkSide Ransomware: Best Practices for Preventing Business Disruption from Ransomware Attacks,” CISA, Washington, DC, USA, May 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa21-131a 

[9] J. E. Larsen et al. , “TRITON: The First ICS Cyberattack on Safety Instrument Systems,” IEEE Security & Privacy ,vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 72–81, 2019, doi: 10.1109/MSEC.2019.2921121. [10] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. ICISSP , 2018, pp. 108–116. [11] N. V. Chawla et al. , “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell. Res. , vol. 16, pp. 321–357, 2002. [12] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. ICLR , 2015. [13] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against state estimation in electric power grids,” 

ACM TISSEC , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–33, 2011. [14] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature , vol. 521, pp. 436–444, 2015. [15] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural Computation , vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. [16] O. Kosut et al. , “Malicious data attacks on the smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 645–658, 2011. 22 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids [17] G. Liang et al. , “A review of false data injection attacks against modern power systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid ,vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1630–1638, 2017. [18] A. S. Musleh et al. , “A survey on detection algorithms for false data injection attacks in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2218–2234, 2020. [19] Y. He, G. J. Mendis, and J. Wei, “Real-time detection of false data injection attacks in smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2505–2516, 2017. [20] W. Lee and S. J. Stolfo, “A framework for constructing features and models for intrusion detection systems,” ACM TISSEC , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 227–261, 2000. [21] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Machine Learning , vol. 20, pp. 273–297, 1995. [22] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning , vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001. [23] M. A. Ferrag et al. , “RDTIDS: Rules and decision tree-based intrusion detection for IoT networks,” Future Internet , vol. 12, no. 3, p. 44, 2020. [24] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Detecting cyberattacks in industrial control systems using convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. CPS-SPC , 2018, pp. 72–83. [25] O. Boyaci et al. , “Joint cyberattack detection and safe state recovery of SCADA systems using graph neural networks,” Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , vol. 31, p. 100710, 2022. [26] S. Debnath et al. , “AI-driven cybersecurity for renewable energy systems: Detecting anomalies with energy-integrated defense data,” International Journal of Applied Mathematics , vol. 38, no. 5s, pp. 1002–1032, Oct. 2025, doi: 10.12732/ijam.v38i5s.367 [27] L. Yang and H. Chen, “Ransomware and intrusion detection based on Transformer model,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 46030–46040, 2022. [28] D. Zhao, T. Wang, and F. Chu, "Feature fusion-based bearing fault diagnosis using a convolutional long short-term memory network," J. Vib. Control , vol. 27, no. 1–2, pp. 27–38, 2021, doi: 10.1177/1077546320907396. [29] W. Xu, I. M. Jaimoukha, and F. Teng, “Robust moving target defence against false data injection attacks in power grids,” IEEE TIFS , vol. 18, pp. 29–40, 2022. [30] A. A. Diro and N. Chilamkurti, “Distributed attack detection using deep learning for IoT,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 82, pp. 761–768, 2018. [31] H. Zhang et al. , “Multi-dimensional feature fusion and stacking ensemble mechanism for intrusion detection,” 

Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 122, pp. 130–143, 2021. [32] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A review of the advancement in intrusion detection datasets,” Procedia Computer Science , vol. 167, pp. 636–645, 2020. [33] M. Zolanvari et al. , “Machine learning-based network vulnerability analysis of IIoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6822–6834, 2019. [34] B. Li et al. , “DeepFed: Federated deep learning for intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Industrial Informatics , vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, 2021. [35] V. Mothukuri et al. , “A survey on security and privacy of federated learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 115, pp. 619–640, 2021. [36] Y. Mirsky et al. , “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. NDSS ,2018. [37] Q. Wen, T. Zhou, C. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Ma, J. Yan, and L. Sun, "Transformers in time series: A survey," in Proc. 32nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI) , Macao, China, 2023, pp. 6778–6786, doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2023/759. [38] R. Huang et al. , “Attention-aware deep reinforcement learning for detecting false data injection attacks in smart grids,” Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. , vol. 147, p. 108815, 2023. [39] M. A. Ferrag, L. Maglaras, A. Ahmim, and H. Janicke, "RDTIDS: Rules and decision tree-based intrusion detection system for Internet-of-Things networks," Future Internet , vol. 12, no. 3, p. 44, 2020, doi: 10.3390/fi12030044. [40] M. Wang, K. Zheng, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “An explainable machine learning framework for intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 73127–73141, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2988359. [41] M. Usama, M. Asim, S. Latif, J. Qadir and Ala-Al-Fuqaha, “Generative adversarial networks for launching and thwarting adversarial attacks on network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 15th Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC) , 2019, pp. 78–83, doi: 10.1109/IWCMC.2019.8766353. 23 A Hybrid CNN-LSTM Intrusion Detection Framework for Cybersecurity in Smart Renewable Energy Grids [42] R. Abdulhammed, M. Faezipour, A. Abuzneid, and A. AbuMallouh, “Deep and machine learning approaches for anomaly-based intrusion detection of imbalanced network traffic,” IEEE Sensors Letters , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–4, Jan. 2019, doi: 10.1109/LSENS.2018.2879990. 24