Title: 2604.20260v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20260v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 00:34:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
TL -RL -FusionNet: An Adaptive and Efficient Reinforcement Learning –Driven 

# Transfer Learning Framework for Detecting Evolving Ransomware Threats 

Jannatul Ferdou s1, Rafiqul Islam 2, Arash Mahboub i3 and Md Zahidul Is lam4                                                       

> 1School of Comp uting, Mathematics and Engineering, Ch arles St urt Univer sity, Wagga Wagga, NSW -2650, Au stralia
> 2School of Comp uting, Mathematics and Engineering, Ch arles St urt Univer sity, Albu ry, NSW -2640, Au stralia
> 3School ofComp uting, Mathematics and Engineering, Charles St urt Univers ity, Port Ma cqu arie, NSW 2444, Au stralia
> 4School of Comp uting, Mathematics and Engineering, Ch arles St urt Univer sity, Bathur st, NSW 2795, Au stralia
> Cor respond ing author:JannatulFerdo us(email: jferdou s@ csu. edu.au)

Abstract 

Modern ransomware demonstrates polymorphic and evasive behaviors by frequently modifying its execution patterns to avoid dete ction. 

This dynamic nature disrupts feature spaces and hinders the efficacy of static or predefined models. To address this challen ge, we present 

TL -RL -FusionNet, a reinforcement learning (RL) -guided hybrid framework that integrates frozen dual transfer learning (TL) backbones 

as feature extractors with a lightweight residual multilayer perceptron (MLP) classifier. The RL agent superv ises training by adaptively 

reweighting samples in response to modifications in the observable behaviors of the ransomware. By providing feedback in the form of 

rewards or penalties, the RL agent emphasizes complex or deceptive cases such as st ealthy ransomware or polymorphic variants 

employing obfuscation while down weighting trivial samples such as benign applications with only simple file I/O operations or 

ransomware with obvious encryption routines that are consistently classified correctly. This adaptive mechanism enables the model to 

dynamically adjust its strategy, improving its resilience against evolving ransomware behaviors while maintaining effective 

classification performance. The framework employs dynamic behavioral features, such as file system operations, registry modifications, 

network traffic, API calls, and anti -analysis checks, which are extracted from sandbox -generated JSON reports. These features were 

then transformed into RGB images and processed through frozen EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3 layers, thereby capturing 

comprehensive feature representations while ensuring efficiency. The final classification was performed using a lightweight residual 

MLP supervised by an RL (Q learning) agent. On a balanced dataset of 1,000 sampl es (500 ransomware, 500 benign), TL -RL -FusionNet 

achieved 99.1% accuracy, 98.6% precision, 99.6% recall, and 99.7 4% AUC, outperforming non -RL baselines by up to 2.5% in accuracy 

and 3.1% in recall. Efficiency profiling further revealed 55% lower training t ime and 59% reduced RAM usage, confirming that 

reinforcement learning not only enhances accuracy but also streamlines computation for real -world ransomware detection .

Keywords : Cybersecurity, EfficientNet, InceptionV3, Interpretability, MLP, Multi -CNN Feat ure Fusion, Q -learning, Ransomware 

Detection, Reinforcement Learning, Sample Weighting, Transfer Learning .

1. Introduction 

Ransomware  has emerged as one of the most destructive 

forms of malware, causing substantial economic losses, 

disrupting critical infrastructure, and threatening data integrity. 

Unlike traditional malware, ransomware encrypts victims’ data 

and demands a ransom, often in cryptocurrency, for the 

decryption key [1 ]. Modern ransomware variants employ 

polymorphism, obfuscation, and anti -analysis strategies, 

making their detection using conventional approaches 

increasingly difficult. Additionally, new attack strategies, such 

as double extortion, in which data are exfil trated and threatened 

with public release, have further magnified the threat. The 

proliferation of Ransomware -as -a-Service (RaaS) [2] has 

lowered the entry barriers for cybercriminals, and the 

widespread use of cryptocurrencies facilitates an onymous 

ransom payments, complicating law -enforcement efforts [3].

As attackers continue to innovate, the need for advanced and 

adaptive ransomware detection mechanisms has become 

increasingly urgent. 

Ransomware detection typically relies on static and dynamic 

analyses  to identify malicious behaviors. Static analysi s

inspects the code structure without execution, thereby 

providing safer and faster detection. However, it faces 

challenges when dealing with obfuscated or polymorphic 

ransomware that employs tactics such as packing and 

encryption techniques. In contrast, dynamic analysis observes 

program behavior during execution, enabling the detection of 

hidden or runtime -triggere d actions in the program. However, 

it is resource -intensive, slow, and susceptible to anti -analysis 

evasion techniques [1].

Early ransomware detection systems employed traditional 

machine learning (ML) techniques such as Random Forests 

(RF) , Support Vector Machines (SVM) , and Logistic 

Regression (LR) . This refers to algorithms that learn from 

features extrac ted from static or dynamic analyses to classify 

benign and malicious activities. However, Traditional ML 

methods require manual feature engineering, making them 

labour -intensive and prone to bias. These models cannot learn 

abstract hierarchies from raw dat a, limiting their adaptability to 

evolving ransomware [4] .

To overcome the reliance on manual features, researchers 

have turned to deep learning (DL) methods for ransomware 

detection because of their ability to extract high -level semantic 

features from raw data and pattern recognition [5] , [6] , [7] , [8 ].

DL, a subfield of ML, trains computers for automated 

prediction by employing multilayer artificial neural networks 

inspired by human brain neurons. These networks consist of interconnected layers that transform input data using nonlinear 

activation funct ions  (e.g., ReLU, Sigmoid, Tanh) , thereby 

enabling hierarchical feature extraction from raw input data. 

The model parameters were optimized through 

backpropagation, where gradients were propagated backward to 

iteratively update the network weights and mini mize errors. By 

combining nonlinear activation functions with 

backpropagation -driven optimization, these models achieve 

superior performance in the analysis of high -dimensional data. 

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [9], [10] , [11 ] and 

Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM) networks [9] have 

demonstrated potential in enhancing detection accuracy. 

Additionally, DL techniques have been widely applied in 

image -based detection pipelines [11] , [12 ], [9] , [13 ]. However, 

these methods require large, balanced datasets for effective 

training and incur high computational costs, making them less 

practical for lightweight and real -wor ld applications. 

Transfer learning (TL) has emerged as a promising solution 

to these challenges in recent years. TL leverages knowledge 

from pretrained CNNs (e.g., ImageNet backbones) to reduce 

training costs and improve generalization on small datasets. TL 

is a machine learning technique that allows a model to use 

previously learned knowledge acquired from one problem 

domain and apply it to another related domain. By reusing 

pretrained extractors, TL enhances detection precision, speeds 

training, and enab les rapid adaptation to new threats. Several 

studies have employed TL for malware classification, showing 

strong generalization with limited data. TL can be applied in 

two modes: (i) using pretrained models as frozen feature 

extractors [13 ], [14 ], [15 ], [16 ] or (ii) full end -to -end fine -

tuning CNNs to learn task -specific features [17] . Despi te these 

advantages, TL -based ransomware detection still lacks 

mechanisms for dynamic adaptation to sample weighting and 

struggles with high resource demands, which are unsuitable for 

resource -constrained environments. In our previous work [18 ],

we achieved state -of -the -art accuracy of up to 99.96% by 

employing full end -to -end fine -tuning of multiple CNNs 

(ResNet, EfficientNetB0, Ince ptionV3, Xception, and VGG) 

models. Although highly accurate, this approach incurs 

substantial training time and memory costs, limiting its 

practicality in real time or resource -constrained environments. 

To address adaptability gaps, researchers have rec ently 

explored the use of RL in cybersecurity applications [19 ], [20 ],

[21] . RL allows an agent to interact with its environment and 

adjust its actions based on rewards, making it suitable for 

dynamic sample reweighting. RL -based strategies can 

emphasize harder or misclassified samples, reduce overfitting 

to trivial cases, and improve generalization to previously 

unseen threats. In ransomware detection, RL offers four key 

benefits: (i) adaptive learning that prioritizes high -value 

security sam ples, (ii) improved efficiency by focusing on 

computation in critical cases, (iii) enhanced robustness to 

evolving attack patterns, and (iv) real -time adaptability to 

changes in the threat landscape. RL also helps address class 

imbalance in security datase ts but lacks CNN -based feature 

extractors' representational power, necessitating a hybrid 

framework. 

Despite advances in DL and TL for ransomware detection, 

existing pipelines remain largely non -adaptive, treating all 

training samples equally. This uniform treatment leaves models 

vulnerable when facing an adaptive adversary such as 

ransomware, which frequently alters its execution strategies to 

evade detection. In such adversarial settings, rare or stealthy 

behaviors are easily overshadowed by more common p atterns 

[22 ], reducing the robustness of static or TL -based approaches. 

RL offers a promising solution as it adaptively adjusts the 

training focus based on feedback, enabling the model to learn 

from the adversary’s evolving strategies. However, prior 

applications of RL in security have mostly been restricted to 

static PE features, Android permissions, or forensic 

classification tasks. 

To overcome these challenges, we developed TL -RL -

FusionNet, a novel hy brid architecture that integrates TL -based 

feature fusion and RL -guided classification with MLP . The RL 

agent dynamically reweights the training samples by assigning 

higher weights to misclassified or challenging instances and 

lower weights to consistently correct instances. This adaptive 

weighting reduces overfitting to trivial patterns and improves 

robustness against evasive or difficult -to -detect ransomware 

behaviors. In this approach, behavioral JSON logs are 

transformed into structured vectors and then RGB images to 

leverage pretrained CNNs, which are optimized for image 

classification and can extract high -level spatial correlations. 

These images were passed through the pretrained CNN 

backbones, EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3, for feature 

extraction. Ef ficientNetB0 provides efficient detail capture, 

whereas InceptionV3 enables multi -scale understanding. Their 

strengths yield a rich combined representation. The fused deep 

features were classified using a proposed residual MLP, and a

set of baseline model s, under the supervision of a Q -learning 

agent that dynamically adjusted the sample weights during 

training based on real -time feedback. This hybrid approach 

ensures a strong defense against ransomware while remaining 

deployable in resource -constrained env ironments. 

The key contributions of this study are as follows: 

1. We propose d a novel hybrid architecture (TL -RL -

FusionNet) where a tabular Q -learning agent reweights 

training samples by assigning higher importance to 

challenging instances while down -weighting trivial ones. 

The agent updates Q -values based on prediction outcomes 

an d is re -initialized per fold under stratified 5 -fold cross -

validation. This adaptive strategy mitigates overfitting, 

reduces false negatives, and improves accuracy compared 

to static training. 

2. We used two pretrained CNN models to obtain a richer and 

more b alanced feature representation. By keeping both 

networks frozen, we maintain inference efficiency by 

avoiding backpropagation through millions of parameters 

and eliminating the need to store deep activation tensors. 

Global -average -pooled feature vectors ar e pre -computed 

and reused during training, which reduces memory usage 

with greater efficiency. 

3. We also designed a lightweight, residual connected MLP 

classifier containing fewer parameters than CNN fine -

tuning, thereby reducing the computation and memory requirements. Because frozen CNNs provide transferable 

representations, the MLP can adapt these features 

efficiently for ransomware detection with high accuracy. 

4. To rigorously assess the impact of the RL -based sample 

weighting, we benchmarked the framework against six 

baseline ML/DL classifiers (RF, XGBoost, SVM, LR, 

ANN, and CNN), both with and without RL. The RL -

enhanced residual MLP achieved 99.1% accuracy and 

99.74% AUC. We further profiled the training and 

inference times as well as memory consumption, 

demonstrating the computational efficiency of the 

framework. Furthermore, we employed t-SNE 

visualizations and Grad -CAM heatmaps to provide 

interpretable insights into feature separability and decision 

behavior. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 

2 reviews related works in detail, covering traditional ML, DL, 

TL, and RL paradigms. Section 3 elaborates on the 

methodology, detailing dataset, CNN -based feature extraction 

and fusion, RL -driven reweighting, and classifiers used. 

Section 4 outlines the experimental setup, evaluation metrics, 

dataset partitioning, and results. Section 5 offers a

comprehensive discussion. Finally, Section 6 concludes the 

paper and suggests directions for future research .

2. Related Works 

This section reviews prior research in three key areas that 

inform our proposed approach: (1) ransomware detection using 

deep learning, (2) transfer learning and multi -CNN fe ature 

fusion, and (3) reinforcement learning for adaptive sample 

reweighting in classification.  This review integrates our 

research into the wider academic discourse, highlights 

unresolved issues, and identifies areas that require further 

investigation.  Table 1 compares the DL, TL, and RL 

approaches. 

2.1 Deep learning for ransomware detection 

The increasing complexity and evasion techniques of modern 

ransomware necessitate a transition from traditional signature -

based detection methods to data -driven approaches. Recent 

studies have employed convolutional neural networks (CNNs), 

recurrent architectures, and hybrid deep models to classify 

ransomware by a nalyzing system logs, behavioral traces, and 

visual representations derived from ransomware binaries or 

execution patterns. 

Manavi and Hamzeh introduced two DL approaches based 

on PE header byte images. The first approach [23 ] employed an 

LSTM model with two recurrent layers and a dense classifier, 

achieving 93.25% accuracy on 1,000 ransomware and 1,000 

benign samples each. The second method [24] extracted 

headers from executables, converted them to grayscale images 

using zigzag patterns, and trained a CNN model with an 

accuracy of 93.33 %. However, this method fails to detect new 

ransomware families . Moreira et al. [11 ] used static analysis to 

identify ransomware by transforming PE header files into color 

images in sequential vector format, classifying them using 

Xception CNN with 98.20% accuracy. They emphasized the 

importance of execution features for understanding adva nced 

ransomware. Qin et al. [25 ] proposed an improved TextCNN 

model using dynamic feature such as API call sequences for 

ransomware detection, achieving an accuracy of 95.9%. 

Similarly, XRan [26] leveraged CNNs on dynamic features 

(API calls, DLLs, mutexes) integrated with XAI methods such 

as LIME and SHAP, achieving a true positive rate of 99.4%. 

However, this method is computationally intensive and time -

consuming. Moreover, SwiftR [27] applied hierarchical neural 

networks across multiple platforms and demonstrated a robust 

cross -platform detection performance. 

Collectively, these studies highlight the promise of deep 

learning for ransomware detection but also reveal persistent 

challenges in computational efficiency, dataset balance, and 

interpretability. 

2.2 Transfer learning for ransomware detection 

TL proves effective in contexts where domain -specific 

training data is limited . Pretrained CNNs such as VGG16, 

ResNet50, EfficientNet, and InceptionV3, originally trained on 

large -scale image datasets (e.g., ImageNet), can be adapted for 

malware image classification through techniques such as fine -

tuning or feature extraction. 

For e xample, Almomani et al. [28 ] introduced E2E -RDS,  a

vision -based ransomware detection system that transforms 

binaries into two -dimensional images, and evaluated 19 CNN 

models. A fine -tuned ResNet50 achieved 99.5% accuracy, 

outperforming the static ML baselines . Rezende et al. [29 ]

used TL with ResNet -50 on grayscale byte plots , reporting 

98.62% accuracy across 9,339 samples from 25 families. 

Although this study underscores the success of TL, it does not 

address the challenges of managing imbal anced datasets or new 

malware variants.  Huang et al. [30 ] developed a hybrid model 

combining static and dynamic image representations, with 

VGG16 achieving 94.7% on hybrid data . However, this study 

did not evaluate the scalability or resource efficiency of the 

model.  In our previous work [18 ], we developed a ransomware 

detection framework that converts sandbox features into 

grayscale and color images and applied fine -tuned CNNs, 

including R esNet50, EfficientNetB0, InceptionV3, Xception, 

VGG16, and VGG19. ResNet50 achieved 99.96% accuracy 

on 500 ransomware and 500 benign samples, respectively. 

However, fine -tuning requires substantial training time and 

memory, limiting its practicality in res ource -constrained 

environments. 

Subsequent studies have demonstrated the benefits of multi -

backbone fusion. Shah et al. [14 ] introduced a dual -stage DWT 

with modified DenseNet -121 for feature extraction and 

machine learning classifiers, with XGBoost achieving 98.58% 

accuracy. The method optimized TL for grayscale inputs but 

lacked evaluation on unseen samples. Rustam et al. [15 ]

proposed a Bi -model framework using VGG16 and ResNet50 

as feature extractors, with traditional classifiers applied on 

fused features; their Bi -SVC achieved 100% accuracy on the 

Malimg dataset, but the work was limited to a single benchmar kdataset, raising concerns of overfitting.  Rezende et al.  [16 ] used 

VGG16 and SVM to classify malware families with 92.97% 

accuracy, but underperformed newer ensembles.  Kumar and 

Panda  [13 ] proposed SDIF -CNN using VGG16, VGG19, 

ResNet50, and InceptionV3 as feature extractors, with an MLP 

classifier achieving 98.55% accuracy on Malimg and strong 

generalization on packed malware. Vasan et al. [12 ] developed 

IMCEC, an ensemble of pretrained CNNs with SVM and 

Softmax classifiers, re aching 99.5% accuracy on Malimg and 

showing resilience to obfuscation. 

Collectively, these studies underscore TL’s ability to deliver 

high accuracy and reduce manual feature engineering. 

However, most existing methods focus on single datasets and 

static visualizations without adaptive sample prioritization. 

Moreover, while accuracy is emphasized, efficiency (time, 

RAM), and model interpretability are less explore d.

Table 1 Comparative sum mary of related studies on ransomware detection. This table synthesizes prior approaches across DL, TL, and RL, 

highlighting feature extractors, feature type and analysis technique, classifiers, datasets, performance, strengths, and limi tations. 

2.3 Reinforcement learnin g methods 

RL has recently been explored for ransomware detection 

owing to its adaptability to evolving such threats. Unlike 

conventional ML, RL agents optimize policies via reward -

driven interactions, making them suitable for dynamic threat 

environments. 

Category  Paper  Feature type and 

analysis 

technique 

Feature Extractor(s)/ 

Classifier(s) 

Dataset 

(R=Ransomware, 

B=Benign) 

Accuracy 

(%) 

Strengths  Limitations 

> Deep Learning (DL)

[23 ] PE header bytes 

(static) 

LSTM  R=1000, B=1000  93.25  Simple DL pip elines, 

no feature engineering 

Small dataset; no unseen 

families 

[24 ] PE images (static)  CNN  R=1000, B=1000  93.33  Simple DL pipelines, 

no featur e engineering 

Unable to detect unseen and 

evolving ransomware 

[11 ] PE header color 

images (static) 

Xception CNN  R=2023, B= 2134  98.20  Improved static image -

based accuracy 

Static features limit 

generalizability by missing 

ransomware behaviors. 

[25 ]. API call 

sequenc es 

(dynamic logs) 

Text CNN  R=1000, B=1000  95.9  Effective on API 

behavior 

Lacks interpretability 

[26 ] API, DLL, mutex 

(dynamic) 

CNN + XAI  R=668 

B=668 

TPR 99.4  High accuracy and 

explainability 

Computationally intensive 

[27 ] Hybrid features  HNN  R= 10.3K 

B=10 K 

98.75  Robust across OS  Computational overhead 

> Transfer Learning (TL)

[28 ] APK files images  19 pre trained models  R=500 

B=500 

99.5  Hybrid static and 

vision analysis 

May struggle with modern 

evolving ransomware. 

[29 ] Malware 

executables into 

images 

ResNet -50  Malimg dataset 

9,339 malware 

samples 

98.62  Robust TL on 

grayscale byteplots 

No imbalance analysis 

[30 ] Hybrid images 

(static and 

dynamic) 

VGG16  M=512 

B=888 

94.70  Hybrid static and 

dynamic based 

detection 

Limited scalability 

[18 ] Image based 

dynamic features 

ResNet50, 

EfficientNetB0, 

InceptionV3, 

R=500 

B=500 

99.96  State -of -the -art 

accuracy 

High training time memory 

[14 ] Grayscale images 

(static) 

DenseNet -121 (feature 

ex tractor) 

XGBoost (classifier) 

Malimg  98.58  Efficiency improved  No assessment was done on 

unseen or obscured samples. 

[15 ] Malware binaries 

into images 

VGG16 and ResNet50 

(feature extractor), 

Bi -SVC (classifier) 

Malimg  100  Bi -model architecture 

with stacked features 

enhances malware 

detection. 

Raising concerns of overfittin g. 

[16 ] Byteplot grayscale 

images 

VGG16 (feature 

extractor), 

SVM (classifier) 

10,136 malware 

samples 

92.97  Removing feature 

engineering 

Underperforming compared to 

newer ensembles. 

[13 ] Malware binaries 

into images 

VGG16, VGG19, 

ResNet50, and 

InceptionV3(feature 

extractor), 

Optimized MLP 

(classifier) 

Malimg  98.55  Ensemble TL 

improves robustness 

and robust to packing 

Computationally heavy 

[12 ] Malware binaries 

into images 

VGG16, ResNet50, 

and InceptionV3 

(feature extractor), 

SVM (classifier) 

Malimg and IoT -

android mobile 

dataset 

98.82  Robust to obfuscation 

and polymorphism 

The authors overlooked the 

effects of image size and data 

imbalance on their method. 

Small and old dataset. 

> Reinforcement Learning (RL)

[19 ] Static PE headers 

features 

Double DQN  Dataset 1 had 

62,485 PE files; 

Dataset 2 included 

688 ransomware 

samples. 

97.9  Early detection; avoids 

execution risk 

Static headers vulnerable to 

packing and obfuscation 

[20 ] Dynamic 

embeddings 

RL + Bayesian 

Networks 

Vulnerability and 

system logs 

N/A  Adaptive resilience 

modelling 

Not direct classification 

[21 ] Android 

permissions and 

network traffic 

features 

DRL (A2C, DQN, 

DDQN, PPO) 

Android 

ransomware 

dataset 

89.78  Improved accuracy, 

recall, F1 

Limited to static attributes 

[31 ] device activity 

pat terns 

FL and RL  - Above 98%  Enhancing adaptability  Scalability underexplored Deng et al. [19 ] proposed an early ransomware detection 

framework that applied Double Deep Q -Learning (D DQN) to 

portable executable (PE) header features. This method 

achieved fast classification but was inherently limited by its 

reliance on static PE headers, which are prone to packing and 

are obfuscated. Kumar et al. [20 ] integrated RL with Bayesian 

networks and dynamic embeddings to strengthen resilience 

modelling across system configurations and vulnerabilities. 

Although effective for adaptive defense, this approach focuses 

on resilience prediction rather than direct ransomware 

clas sification. Jeremiah et al. [21 ] used Deep Reinforcement 

Learning (A2C, DQN, DDQN, PPO) on Android per missions 

and network traffic. Their A2C and DDQN models surpassed 

traditional ML baselines in accuracy and speed, though they 

only considered static features rather than behavioral 

representations. CyberForce uses federated reinforcement 

learning (FRL) for IoT malware mitigation, achieving 98% 

accuracy and reducing training time by 67% versus centralized 

methods [31] .

While RL shows promise in adaptability and performance, 

studies are limited to static PE features and Android contexts, 

with minimal focus on image -based ransomware or accuracy -

efficiency optimization. 

This comprehensive synthesis of the existing literatu re 

reveals  that while each paradigm ML, DL, TL, and RL offers 

unique advantages, none individually addresses the full set of 

requirements for modern ransomware detection. Traditional 

ML methods fail to generalize beyond handcrafted features, 

whereas DL met hods achieve high accuracy but require large 

datasets and computational resources. TL addresses these 

issues by leveraging pretrained models; however, most TL -

based approaches remain non -adaptive and treat all samples 

equally, leading to overfitting on tri vial patterns while 

neglecting hard -to -detect behaviors. Although TL is 

increasingly used in malware analysis, the integration of RL 

to adaptively reweight training samples has not been explored 

in the ransomware domain. To the best of our knowledge 

accord ing to the literature, no prior study has integrated TL 

with RL in an image -based ransomware detection pipeline. 

This motivated the development of TL -RL -FusionNet, which 

bridges these gaps by (a) transforming dynamic behavioral 

features into images, (b) ex tracting complementary 

embeddings through frozen EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3 

backbones, and (c) training a lightweight residual MLP under 

a Q -learning -based sample -weighting agent. 

3. Methodology 

This section outlines the comprehensive methodology 

employed in the study, encompassing dataset preparation, 

preprocessing, and the design of the proposed TL -RL -

FusionNet framework.  Fig . 1 illustrates the overall architecture 

and operational workflow of the proposed end -to -end 

framework for detecting ransomware. The methodology is 

systematically organized into six components: (i) Dataset 

preparation, (ii) Data preprocessing, (iii) Feature C onversion, 

(iv) Dual -CNN feature extraction and fusion, (v) 

Reinforcement learning -guided training, and (vi) Description of 

classifiers utilized in this study. 

3.1 Dataset 

This study was evaluated using a custom dataset created in 

our previous study [18 ]. It contains 1,000 binary executables, 

comprising 500 ransomware and 500 benign programs 

collected from various online repositories. All ransomware 

samples were collected from MalwareBazaar [32 ] and 

VirusShare [33 ] and selected from 25 distinct ransomware 

families, as classified by threat intelligence. Benign samples 

were obtained from trusted repositories such as SnapFiles 

[34 ], PortableApps.com [35] , and GitHub [36 ], which ensured 

low label noise and high dataset integrity. Certain criteria were 

applied to select both the ransomware families and individual 

ransomware samples within each family to ensure the dataset’s 

relevance, diversity, representativeness, and operational 

significance. 

Two criteria were applied for the selection of the 

ransomware family: 

1. Its high preval ence and significant global impact on 

organizations have been documented in multi -source 

threat intelligence reports from 2019 [37 ], 2020 [38 ],

2021 [39 ], 2022  [40 ], 2023 [41 ], and 2024  [42 ].

2. Verification across at least two independent reports from 

reputable cybersecurity vendors. 

This selection method aimed to identify prominent 

ransomware families, such as LockBit, MedusaLocker, 

BlackCat, Phobos, and Conti, to ensure that  the dataset 

included  representative coverage of advanced and adaptive 

threats. Prioritizing these high -impact variants enhances the 

understanding of critical ransomware behaviors and increases 

the relevance of the dataset for detection models .

Individual ransomware samples within each family were 

selected following the procedure described in [11 ], with three 

criteria applied based on the VirusTotal vendor engine 

detection. A ransomware sample was included if it met all the 

following criteria: 

1. At least 45 antivirus engines on VirusTotal classified the 

files as malicious. 

2. At least 15 antivirus engines specifically labelled the files 

as ransomware. 

3. The majority of engines or at least ten, identified the file 

as belonging to the same ransomware family. 

Each sample was executed in an isolated Cuckoo Sandbox 

environment [43 ], and reports were generated in JSON format, 

which documented both the ransomware attack lifecycle and 

the normal footprint of benign software, forming the basis for 

feature extraction. A custom Python -based pipeline was then 

used to parse these reports into structured, fixed -length feature 

vectors. From each sample, 100 highly discriminative 

behavioral indicators were selected , spanning file -system 

changes, registry modifications, network activity, process and 

memory operations, API call patterns, and anti -analysis 

artifacts.  The selected features were cross -referenced with 

MITRE ATT&CK tactics and validated against threat reports 

from Sophos, CrowdStrike, and Trend Micro (2019 –2024). 

This curated set ensures technical depth, practical relevance, 

and improved model detection performance across ransomware 

families. Fig . 1. End -to -end  TL -RL -FusionNet workflow for ransomware detection. Table 2 presents the detailed distribution of the ransomware 

families included in this study and the corresponding number of 

samples.                                     

> Table 2Ransomware families included in this study, with sample
> counts .Families were selected based on global prevalence,
> documented impact, and multi -vendor confirmation of classification.
> Family name No. of samples
> Ryuk 15
> GandCrab 28
> Cerber 9
> Maze 8
> Makop 12
> RagnarLocker (Ragnarok) 23
> NetWalker 24
> Mespinoza (Pysa) 18
> Clop 10
> REvil (Sodinokibi) 26
> LockBit 30
> Phobos 24
> WastedLocker 25
> DarkSide 24
> Avaddon 16
> MountLocker 15
> Thanos 28
> Conti 18
> Nefilim 11
> BlackCat 30
> Babuk 27
> BlackMatter 28
> MedusaLocker 28
> Mallox 15
> BlueSky 8

3.2 Data preprocessing 

Data preprocessing is a critical step in ensuring the quality, 

consistency, and compatibility of machine learning training and 

evaluation. In this study, three key preprocessing steps were 

applied: removal of duplicate records, encoding of categorical 

attributes into numeric form, and feature scaling and 

standardization. The result was a clean, fully numeric dataset 

that was prepared for subsequent analysis and model 

development. 

1. Duplicate removal : Duplicate records from repeated 

executions or redundant reports were removed to prevent 

bias and ensure reliable generalization of the model .

2. Categorical encoding: Non -numeric fields were 

transformed into numerical values to ensure 

compatibility wi th the machine learning models. 

i) Boolean indicators (e.g., privilege escalation, shadow 

copy deletion, evasion) were encoded as binary (1/0); (ii) 

string attributes (e.g., IP origin, country) were mapped to 

numeric values based on length or frequency; a nd (iii) 

list -based features (e.g., dropped files, DNS requests, 

VirusTotal positives) were represented by element 

counts .

3. Feature scaling and standardization : Normalization was 

applied to ensure that all features operated on a uniform 

scale, thereby impro ving the classifier convergence and 

stability. 

4. Updated optimal dataset with top selected features: 

the optimized dataset comprises the top 100 high -discriminative 

features selected through feature selection and validated via 

MITRE ATT&CK and threat intelligence mapping, effectively 

reducing dimensionality and computational cost while 

preserving maximal detection accuracy. 

This preprocessing pipeline ensured a fully numeric, 

standardized dataset ready for structured -to -image 

transformation and classi fication in TL -RL -FusionNet. 

3.3 Conversion of structured features into image 

To enable CNN -based transfer learning, the one -dimensional 

feature vectors were reshaped into 224×224 matrices and 

encoded as RGB images using a colormap. This transformation 

prese rved the inter -feature relationships while providing a 

visual domain for pretrained CNN backbones to extract deep 

representations. 

3.4 Transfer learning for feature fusion from image data 

Two pretrained CNNs, EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3, 

were used as frozen feature extractors. Both models were 

pretrained on ImageNet, and their convolutional layers were 

frozen to preserve powerful, generalized image representation 

capabilities. Their sele ction was driven by two key factors. 

1. Complementary strengths: EfficientNetB0 applies 

compound scaling to balance the resolution, width, and depth 

efficiently, making it highly suitable for extracting fine -grained 

ransomware behaviors with a low paramet er count. 

InceptionV3 incorporates inception modules that capture 

semantic patterns at multiple scales, complementing the local 

detail focus of EfficientNet. For each input image, both CNNs 

generated global average pooled feature embeddings. To 

enhance the richness and discriminability of the 

representations, the pooled outputs from EfficientNetB0 and 

InceptionV3 were concatenated into a single fused feature 

vector. This fusion leverages the complementary learning 

characteristics of both the CNN architectur es. The resulting 

combined vector captures a broader spectrum of spatial, texture, 

and frequency features, enabling a stronger classification 

performance downstream. 

2. Proven success in ransomware detection: Image -based 

CNN pipelines consistently achieve state -of -the -art accuracy in 

ransomware detection. In our previous study  [18 ], ResNet50 

achieved the highest accuracy (99.96%), fo llowed by 

EfficientNetB0 (99.78%) and InceptionV3 (97.84%). Although 

ResNet50 performed the best, its training cost was significantly 

higher. EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3 offered the optimal 

trade -off between accuracy and efficiency, making them the 

most practical choices for dual frozen feature extraction in the 

TL -RL -FusionNet. Their selection is further supported by the 

proven success in the broader ransomware detection literature, 

where both models have demonstrated strong generalization 

and effective ness across diverse datasets .

3.5 Reinforcement learning -based sample weighting 

RL is a machine learning paradigm in which an agent learns 

to make sequential decisions through trial -and -error 

interactions with an environment, aiming to maximize the 

cumulative reward. Unlike supervised learning, RL does not 

rely solely on labelled datasets; instead, it learns optimal 

strategies through feedback from the environment [19 ].In ransomware detection, RL can guide a model to emphasize 

the most informative samples during training. Rather than 

treating all data points equally, the RL agent assigns varying 

weights to the training samples, enabling the classifier to focus 

on examples that are more influential in improving the decision 

boundaries. This targeted weighting helps the model learn 

patterns that are more representative of ransomware and benign 

behaviors, even when these patterns ar e subtle or imbalanced in 

the dataset. 

The general interaction loop between the RL components is 

illustrated in  Fig. 2, which highlights the flow of states, actions, 

and rewards [44 ]. At each time step t, the agent observes the 

current state St , selects an action At , receives a reward Rt from 

the environment based on the classification performance, and 

transitions to the next state St+1 . Over time, the agent optimizes 

its decision policy by balancing exploration of new weighting 

strategies with exploitation of those that have high -reward 

actions. 

3.5.1 RL component mapping in our study 

In our ransomware detection framework, the environment is 

the model training dataset in each cross -validation fold. The RL 

integration proceeds as follows. 

• Agent: The agent is a Q-learning –based sample 

weighting module 

• Environment: Environment is the ransomware 

classification model and its performance on the training 

split within each cross -valid ation fold. 

• State (St ): Q-table row values representing the learned 

weight preferences for each training sample. 

• Action (At ): Selection of one of five discrete sample 

weight values {0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5} 

• Reward (Rt ): Assigned as +1 if the sample is correctly 

classified by the current model during training or 0 if 

misclassified. 

• Policy update: Q-values are updated using the standard 

Q-learning update rule, based solely on test predictions. 

In the context of our ransomware detection framework, RL 

offers the following two key advantages: 

1. Adaptive focus on hard samples : The agent can assign 

greater importance to ransomware samples that the 

classifier struggles with, reducing the misclassification 

risk. 

2. Dynamic adjus tment over epochs : Sample weights are 

updated iteratively based on the ongoing model 

performance, allowing the system to adapt to evolving 

decision boundaries. 

3.5.2 Integration into model training pipeline 

The RL mechanism described here is applied within the 

cross -validation framework defined in Section 4.3. For every 

fold in the stratified 5 -fold CV, the RL agent was re -initialized 

to ensure that no learned weighting policy from previous folds 

influenced the current evaluation. All Q -value updates and 

re ward assignments are computed exclusively from the training 

split of that fold, completely excluding the test set predictions. 

This integration guarantees that the adaptive weighting process 

is learned under the same conditions as the model training, 

witho ut any data leakage. 

Operational flow per fold in CV 

1) Agent initialization : At the start of each fold, the 

reinforcement learning (RL) agent was initialized with a fresh 

Q-table of shape ( N,5), where N is the number of training 

samples. All the Q -values were set to zero. The discrete action 

set of possible sample weight multipliers is :

A= {0.25, 0.50, 1.00, 1.25, 1.50} (1) 

2) State representation : Each training sample i is treated as a 

state Si, represented by the ith row of the Q -table as follows: 

Q (S i,

⋅) ∈R5 (2) 

3) Action selection ( weight assignment) : For each training 

sample i, the agent selects an action a i using an ϵ-greedy policy 

as follows:                 

> 𝑎 𝑖 ={uniform (𝐴 )with probability 𝜀 (exploration )
> arg max 𝑎 ∈𝐴 𝑄 (𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑎 )with probability 1−𝜀 (exploitation )

(3) 

The selected action directly sets the sample training weight as 

follows: 

𝑤 𝑖 = 𝑎 𝑖 ∈ 𝐴 (4) 

After weights are assigned for the fold, the agent decays its 

exploration rate as follows: 

𝜀 ← 𝜀 . 𝜖 𝑑𝑒 𝑐 𝑎𝑦 (5) 

4) Reward calculation (as implemented) : After training the 

classifier on the weighted training data, predictions 𝑦 ̂𝑖 were 

generated for the validation split. The reward for each 

validation sample i is as follows: 

𝑟 𝑖 = {1 𝑖𝑓 𝑦 ̂𝑖 = 𝑦 𝑖 ,

0 otherwise . (6) 

This design uses validation predictions to guide the Q -table 

updates, ensuring that the weighting adjustments are influenced 

by the model performance on unseen data within the fold, thus 

encouraging generalizable weighting strategies. 

5) Q -value update ( same -state bootstrapping) : The Q -value for 

the executed action is updated as follows:    

> Fig. 2.Basic Reinforcement Learning components and information
> flow between Agent and Environment, showing the sequence of state
> observation, action selection, reward feedback, and state transition.

𝑄 (𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑎 𝑖 ) ← 𝑄 (𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑎 𝑖 ) + 𝛼 [𝑟 𝑖 + 𝛾 max 𝑎 ∈𝐴 𝑄 (𝑆 𝑖 , 𝑎 ) − 𝑄 (𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑎 𝑖 )]

(7) 

where α is the learning ra te and γ is the discount factor. 

Bootstrapping is performed using the same state Si, which is 

consistent with the implementation. 

6) Weighted training objective : In this phase, the model 

parameters were optimized using a weighted loss function, in 

which each training sample was assigned an importance weight 

by a reinforcement learning (RL) agent. These RL -assigned 

weights enable the model to focus on samples that contribute 

more significantly to learning, thereby improving 

generalization and model e fficiency. Training minimizes the 

weighted mean loss used by Keras as follows: 

𝐿 𝑅𝐿 = ∑ 𝑤 𝑖 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 ,𝑦 ̂ 𝑖 )𝑁  

> 𝑖 =1
> ∑𝑤 𝑖
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

, (8) 

where ℓ (⋅) is the base loss (categorical cross -entropy with label 

smoothing), wi is the RL -assigned weight, and 𝑦 ̂𝑖 =fθ(x i) is the 

model prediction for input xi.

The optimal model parameters were obtained as follows: 

𝜃 ∗ = argmin 𝜃 𝐿 𝑅𝐿 (9) 

where θ ∗= is the optimal set of model parameters after training 

that minimizes the total weighted loss over all N training 

samples, and argminθ = “Argument of the minimum" it means 

we search for the θ that makes the expression inside have the 

smallest value. 

The complete process is outlined in Algorithm 2, which 

describes the update mechanism for the RL agent in each fold .                                                                

> Algorithm 2: RL -Based Dynamic Sample Weighting Agent
> Input:
> Number of samples N
> Action space 𝒜 = {0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5}
> RL parameter s: α (learning rate), γ (discount), ε (exploration), ε decay
> Ground truth labels yand model predictions ŷ
> Output:
> Sample weights w∈ℝᴺ(for the training set T)
> Updated Q-Table Q∈ℝᴺ×| 𝒜 |
> 1. Initialization:
> Q← zeros ( N, | 𝒜 |); aᵢ ← 0 ∀i∈{1, …, N}
> 2. Assign Weights (Training Phase):
> For each sample i
> ∈T:
> Choose action index a by ε -greedy over Q(i, ·)
> Set aᵢ ←a
> Assign weight wᵢ←𝒜 [a]
> Update exploration: ε←ε × ε decay
> 3. Update Q-table (Validation Phase):
> For each sample i
> ∈V:
> 𝑅𝑒𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑑 𝑟 ←{1,ŷ𝑖 =𝑦 𝑖
> 0,𝑜𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑒
> Update:
> Q[i, a ᵢ] ← Q[i, a ᵢ] + α(r+γ· maxₐ Q[i, a ] − Q[i, a ᵢ])
> Notes:
> aᵢ stores the last action index associated with sample i; if no action was
> assigned previously, aᵢ = 0
> (Default weight: 0.25).
> Training minimizes the Keras -weighted mean loss: 𝐿 𝑅𝐿 =∑𝑤 𝑖 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 ,𝑦 ̂𝑖 )𝑁
> 𝑖 =1
> ∑𝑤 𝑖
> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

3.6 Classifiers used in this study 

Although the RL -weighted MLP represents the core of our 

proposed approach, we benchmarked its performance against 

six other classifiers, both with and without RL -based 

weighting. These models were selected to represent a diverse 

range of learnin g paradigms, from traditional to ensemble and 

deep learning models. 

3.6.1 Residual MLP model development (proposed) 

The Residual MLP is a specialized feed -forward neural 

network designed to process fixed -length feature vectors 

extracted from pretrained CN Ns. Unlike conventional 

multilayer Perceptrons, the Residual MLP integrates residual 

skip connections within its hidden layers to improve gradient 

propagation, alleviate the vanishing gradient problem, and 

enable stable training of deeper architectures. Th is design 

ensures that the model maintains a high representational 

capacity while avoiding the degradation in performance often 

observed when additional layers are added to a standard MLP. 

An architectural diagram of the residual MLP for ransomware 

classif ication is shown in  Fig . 3.

The network begins with a fully connected (dense) layer 

comprising 1,024 hidden units, followed by batch 

normalization to stabilize the learning dynamics and dropout 

regularization to mitig ate overfitting. The core of the 

architecture consists of two Residual Blocks, each 

implementing a bottleneck structure. In each block, the input 

passes through a dense layer with 256 units and a Rectified 

Linear Unit (ReLU) activation, followed by batch 

normalization and another dense layer that restores the 

dimensionality to 1,024 units. A skip connection adds the 

original input of the block to its transformed output, after which 

a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation is applied. A dropout 

was introduc ed after each block to further reduce overfitting. 

The final output layer applies a softmax activation for binary 

classification (ransomware vs. benign).  The complete 

architectural values are summarized in  Table 3, and the training 

configuration and hyperparameters are provided in  Table 4.

The classification process of the proposed lightweight MLP 

is detailed in the following section, including its linear 

transformations, nonlinear activations, residual connections, 

normalization, and regularization strategies. 

Input processing and dense layer transformation: The 

classification process begins with a concatenated feature vector 

extracted from multiple CNN backbones (EfficientNetB0, 

InceptionV3) that undergoes a linear transformation. Dense 

layers perform linear transformations of the input v ector x using 

a weight matrix W and bias vector b, followed by an activation 

function, ReLU, which is used in the hidden layers. Hence the 

linear output (z) can be determined as -

𝑧 = 𝑊 𝑥 + 𝑏 (10) 

ReLU(z) is defined as Table 3 Residual MLP architectural values                          

> Layer Output Shape Parameters
> Input (None, 3328) 0
> Dense (None, 1024) 3,408,896
> BatchNormalization (None, 1024) 4,096
> Dropout (0.3) (None, 1024) 0
> Residual Block ×2 (None, 1024) 1,053,184
> Dense (256) (None, 256) 262,400
> BatchNormalization (None, 256) 1,024
> Dense (1024) (None, 1024) 263,168
> Add + ReLU (None, 1024) 0
> Dropout (0.2) (None, 1024) 0
> Output Dense (Softmax, 2) (None, 2) 2,050
> Total Parameters 4,468,226

Table 4 Training and hyperparameters             

> Parameter Value
> Activations ReLU (hidden), Softmax (output)
> Dropout Rates 0.3 (pre -block), 0.2 (inside block)
> Normalization BatchNorm after each Dense
> Optimizer Adam
> Learning Rate Cosine annealing, init 1e -3
> Loss Categorical cross -entropy with label smoothing 0.1
> Batch Size 32
> Epochs 25
> Cross -validation 5-fold stratified
> Sample Weighting RL ε -greedy; Actions = {0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5};
> Reward = 1 if correct, else 0

𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑧 ) = {𝑧 , 𝑖𝑓 𝑧 𝑖𝑠 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 (𝑧 > 0), 𝑖𝑡 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑦𝑠 𝑡 ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑒 

0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑧 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 (𝑧 ≤ 0), 𝑖𝑡 𝑏𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑠 0

(11) 

The hi dden layers apply the ReLU activation to the linear 

output as follows: 

ReLU (𝑧 ) = max (0, 𝑧 ) (12) 

Combining the two s teps, the dense layer transformation for 

the hidden layers can be expressed as 

𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 (𝑥 ) = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑊 𝑥 + 𝑏 ) = max (0, 𝑊 𝑥 + 𝑏 ) (13) 

This formulation ensures nonlinear feature mapping while 

maintaining computational efficiency, as ReLU introduces 

spars ity by zeroing negative activations. 

Residual Connections: Following the Dense transformations, each 

residual block implements identity shortcuts that add the input vector 

x to the block’s transformed output F (x, W) before applying 

activation: 

𝑦 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝐹 (𝑥 , 𝑊 ) + 𝑥 ) (14) 

Here, F (x, W) denotes the tra nsformation consisting of the 

Dense –BatchNorm –Dense sequence within a block. This 

additive formulation allows the network to learn modifications 

to the identity mapping rather than the complete 

transformation, facilitating a faster convergence and improved 

generalization. 

Regularization strategy: Regularization was applied in two 

forms. 

Dropout: A dropout rate of 0.3 was applied immediately after 

the initial dense layer, and a rate of 0.2 was applied after each 

residual block. This stochastically removes a fraction of the 

units during training, forcing the network to learn redundant 

representations and reducing overfitting. 

Batch normalization: Batch normalization is performed after 

every dense layer to normalize intermediate activat ions, reduce 

internal covariate shift, and enable the use of higher learning 

rates without divergence. 

Softmax output layer: For the output layer, a Softmax 

activation is applied to produce the probabilities for each class. 

For class i, the probability is given by 

𝑦 ̂𝑖 = 𝑒 𝑧 𝑖  

> ∑𝑒 𝑧 𝑖 𝐶
> 𝑗 =1

(15) 

By substituting z=Wx+b, we 

𝑦 ̂𝑖 = 𝑒 (𝑊 𝑥 +𝑏 )𝑖  

> ∑𝑒 (𝑊 𝑥 +𝑏 )𝑖 𝐶
> 𝑗 =1

(16) 

where C is the number of classes and z is the input to the 

softmax function. For binary classification (C=2) , softmax 

reduces to th e logistic sigmoid for one output neuron, 

providing interpretable class probabilities. 

RL -guided classification: During training, the RL agent 

dynamically adjusted the sample weights to prioritize harder or 

more informative examples. The agent employs an ε -greedy 

policy over discrete weight multipliers {0.25,0.5,1.0,1.25,1.5}, 

updating the Q -values based on whether t he predictions are 

correct (reward = 1) or incorrect (reward = 0) for the training 

split. This ensures that the model increasingly focuses on 

Fig . 3. Architectural  diagram of  residual MLP samples that yield the highest performance gains during 

training. 

Training and optimization: The network were trai ned using the 

Adam optimizer with a cosine annealing learning rate 

schedule, starting from an initial learning rate of 1×10 −3 . The 

categorical cross -entropy loss function was employed with a 

label smoothing factor of 0.1 to encourage the model to be less 

overconfident and improve its ability to generalize. The model 

was trained for 25 epochs with a batch size of 32 under a 5 -

fold stratified cross -validation protocol to ensure robust 

performance estimation. 

Algorithm 3 summarizes only the forward classificat ion 

pipeline of the residual MLP from the feature vector input to 

the probability estimation. 

Algorithm 3: Lightweight Residual MLP Classifier 

Input: Feature vector x ∈ ℝᵈ 

Output: Softmax probability vector ŷ ∈ ℝᶜ 

1. Input Layer: 

h₀ ← Dropout (0.3) [ BatchNorm (ReLU 

(Dense₁₀₂₄(x)))] 

2. Residual Block × 2: 

For each block: 

res ← h 

h ← Dense₂₅₆ → ReLU → BatchNorm → Dense₁₀₂₄ 

h ← Dropout (0.2) (ReLU (h + res)) 

3. Output Layer: 

ŷ ← Softmax (Dense_C(h)) 

4. Training: 

Optimizer: Adam with cosine annealing (η₀ = 

1×10⁻³) 

Loss: categorical cross -entropy with label smoothing 

(α = 0.1) 

Batch size = 32, Epochs = 25, 5 -fold cross -validation 

3.6.2 Baseline models 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed RL -guided 

MLP model, we selected a set of diverse and widely used 

baseline models spanning traditional machine learning and deep 

learning paradigms. These include RF, XGBoost, SVM, LR, 

ANN and CNN. Each model in the benchmark set was carefully 

selected based on its relevance in the ransomware classification 

literature, compatibility with the transformed feature space 

(CNN -extracted high -level embeddings), and ability to provide 

complementary perspectives on learning behavior under RL -

based sample weighting. Because the dataset consists of 

ransomware and benign behavior represented as color images, 

feature extraction was performed using EfficientNetB0 and 

InceptionV3, whose embeddings were concatenated to form a 

high -dimensional and discriminative feature vector. This 

selection ensured diverse methodological par adigms that 

aligned well with the characteristics of the dataset and proposed 

method. 

Tree -based ensembles (RF, XGBoost) are well -suited 

because they handle high -dimensional, structured embeddings 

efficiently and provide robustness against feature noise, 

enabling the capture of nonlinear interactions among CNN -

extracted features. Margin -based and linear learners (SVM, 

LR) offer complementary perspectives by leveraging the 

inherent separability of the CNN embeddings. While SVM 

exploits high -dimensional margi ns with kernel functions, LR 

provides a linear baseline to test whether the features are 

linearly separable. Neural networks (ANN and CNN) extend 

the evaluation to deep learning paradigms. ANN leverages 

dense layers to capture higher -order dependencies wit hin 

concatenated embeddings, whereas CNN assesses whether 

spatial locality from image representations is preserved and 

beneficial after feature fusion. 

This diversity ensures that the proposed RL -guided MLP 

model is benchmarked against classical and interp retable 

models and advanced deep learners, establishing both fairness 

and contextual relevance. 

The working processes of these classifiers, including their 

training and prediction mechanisms, are described in the 

following sections. 

Random Forest (RF): Random Forest is an ensemble learning 

method that constructs multiple decision trees using 

bootstrapped subsets of the training data and random subsets 

of features at each split. The final prediction is obtained by 

aggregating the outputs of all trees thro ugh majority voting, 

thereby reducing the variance and enhancing the robustness 

against overfitting [45] .

The prediction of a Random Forest with M trees can be 

expressed as 

𝑦 ̂ = 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒 {ℎ𝑚 (𝑥 ) |𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀 } (17) 

where hm(x) is the prediction of the mth decision tree. 

By aggregating multiple wea k learners, Random Forest 

achieves stable performance on high -dimensional CNN -

derived features, making it effective for classifying 

ransomware, as it leverages the robustness of ensemble 

methods to improve detection accuracy. 

Support Vector Machine (SVM): The SVM classifier is a 

supervised ML model that divides an n -dimensional space -

based representation of the data into two classes using a 

selected boundary known as a hyperplane. This hyperplane 

maximizes the margin between the two regions or classe s (in 

our experiment, ransomware, or benign software). The 

maximal margin is defined as the largest distance between 

examples of both classes computed from the distance between 

their closest instances (called supporting vectors) [5] . It is 

desi gned to maximize class separability while minimizing the 

classification error using slack variables. 

Formally, the optimal hyperplane is represented by a vector 

w and a scalar m such that the inner products of w with vectors 

ϕ(x) from the two classes are divided by an interval between 

−1 and +1 subject to b. Prediction is given by: 

𝑦 ̂ = 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛 (𝑤 𝑇 ∅(𝑥 ) + 𝑏 (18) 

where w 

> ⊤

denotes the transpose of the weight vector w.

The ability of SVM to handle high -dimensional fused features 

makes it a strong baseline for distinguishing ransomware from 

benign classes, particularly when dual -CNN embeddings 

increase feature separability. 

Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost): XGBoost is an 

advanced ensem ble learning technique that enhances the traditional gradient boosting algorithm by integrating strong 

regularization terms to prevent overfitting in the model. Its 

scalability and efficiency make it particularly effective for 

high -dimensional features. XG Boost builds models 

sequentially, where each new learner attempts to reduce the 

residual errors of the previous ensemble [46 ].

The learning objective combines a data fitting loss with a 

regularization penalty: 

𝐿 (𝜃 ) = ∑ 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑦 ̂𝑖 ) + ∑ 𝛺 (𝑓 𝑘 )𝐾  

> 𝑘 =1
> 𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

(19) 

Here, L(θ) represents the overall regularized objective, 𝑙 (𝑦 𝑖 , 𝑦 ̂𝑖 )

is the loss between the true and predicted labels, K is the total 

number of boosting trees, and 𝛺 (𝑓 𝑘 ) is the regularization 

component that penalizes model complexity. The regularization 

functio n is typically defined as 

𝛺 (𝑓 𝑘 ) = 𝛾 𝑇 + 1 

> 2

𝜆 ||𝑤 ||2 (20) 

where T is the number of leaves in the decision tree, γ is the 

regularization coefficient that penalizes the number of leaves, 

and λ is the regularization parameter applied to the leaf weights 

w.

The final prediction was obtained by aggregating the outputs 

of all boosted trees: 

𝑦 ̂ = ∑ 𝜂 ℎ𝑚 (𝑥 )𝑀  

> 𝑚 =0

(21) 

where M denotes the total number of trees, ℎ𝑚 (𝑥 ) is the 

prediction from the mth tree, and η is the learning rate that 

controls the contribu tion of each tree. 

XGBoost constructs a robust model that effectively minimizes 

the loss function and mitigates overfitting, thereby enhancing 

its efficacy for the classification task of Ransomware 

Detection. 

Logistic Regression (LR): LR is a linear classifier that 

estimates the probability of a sample belonging to a particular 

class using the logistic (sigmoid) activation function. It is 

mainly used in binary classification tasks, using a logistic 

function (0 -1) to estimate probabiliti es [47] . It is typically 

trained using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) by 

minimizing the cross -entropy (log -loss) function. 

For the binary classification of ransomware ( y=1) versus 

benign ( y=0) b ased on the fused feature embeddings, the 

probability function is defined as 

𝑃 ̂ (𝑦 = 1|𝑥 ) = 𝜎 (𝑤 𝑇 𝑥 + 𝑏 ) = 1 

> 1+𝑒 −(𝑤 𝑇 𝑥 +𝑏 )

(22) 

where P ̂ (y= 1│x) is the predicted probability that x belongs to 

the ransomware class, x is the feature vector, w is the weight 

vector learned during training, b is the bias term, 𝑤 𝑇 𝑥 is the 

linear combination of features, and σ ( ⋅) is the sigmoid 

activation function. 

Logistic Regression provides a simple yet effective baseline 

classifier to evaluate whether ransomware and benign samples 

are linearly separable in the feature space. Although more 

complex models (e.g., RL -guided residual MLP or XGBoost) 

can capture nonlin ear interactions, LR offers interpretability 

and serves as a benchmark against which more advanced 

classifiers can be compared. 

Artificial Neural Network (ANN): Artificial Neural Networks 

consist of multiple fully connected layers that can learn 

complex no nlinear mappings from inputs to outputs. Each 

hidden layer transforms its input through a weighted linear 

combination, followed by a nonlinear activation [47 ].

For the lth hidden layer, 

ℎ𝑙 = 𝜎 (𝑊 (𝑙 )ℎ(𝑙 −1) + 𝑏 (𝑙 ) (24) 

where ℎ𝑙 is output (activation vector) of the lth hidden layer, 

ℎ(𝑙 −1) is input vector from the (l−1) th layer 𝑊 (𝑙 ) is the weight 

matrix mapping inputs to hidden layer l, 𝑏 (𝑙 ) is the bias vector 

of hidden layer l, σ (⋅) is the nonlinear activation function (e.g., 

ReLU) 

The final output layer applies the Softmax activation to 

produce class probabilities for binary classification 

(ransomware vs. benign): 

𝑦 ̂ = softmax (𝑊 𝐿 ℎ(𝐿 −1) + 𝑏 𝐿 (25) 

Where, 𝑦 ̂ is predicted probability distribution over the two 

classes, 𝑊 𝐿 is weight matrix of the final output layer, b(L ) is 

bias vector of the final layer, h(L−1 ) is the output of the last 

hidden layer before classification. 

The network parameters were optimiz ed via backpropagation 

to minimize the categorical cross -entropy. ANN captures 

nonlinear interactions within the fused features, making it 

suitable for ransomware detection tasks. 

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): Convolutional Neural 

Networks are design ed to capture local spatial patterns in 

images through convolutional layers, followed by pooling, 

nonlinear activations, and fully connected layers [9][48 ]. The 

convolutional operation is defined as: 

ℎ𝑖 ,𝑗  

> (𝑘 )

= 𝜎 (∑ 𝑋 𝑖 +𝑝 ,𝑗 +𝑞 . 𝐾 𝑝 ,𝑞  

> (𝑘 )
> 𝑝 ,𝑞

+ 𝑏 (𝑘 ) (26) 

Where X is the input image, K(k) is the convolutional kernel, 

and h(k) is the resulting feature map. The final classification was 

performed using a softmax layer: 

𝑦 ̂ = softmax (𝑊 ℎ + 𝑏 ) (27) 

Where, 𝑦 ̂ = predicted probability distribution across the two 

classes (ransomware, benign) 

W = weight matrix of the final fully connected layer 

h = flattened feature vector after convolution + pooling 

operations 

b = bias vector for the classification layer 

4. Experiment and results 

This section outlines the lab setup, dataset splitting and 

evaluation strategy, evaluation metrics, and result analysis 

used to validate the TL -RL -FusionNet framework. Our 

experiments were designed to assess the efficiency and 

robu stness of the RL -driven sample weighting when combined 

with dual -backbone CNN feature extraction and MLP 

classification. 4.1 Experimental setup 

The experimental setup of this study integrated advanced 

tools and techniques to detect ransomware using dynamic 

analysis methods. The analysis environment employed a

Cuckoo Sandbox [43 ] was used to securely execute and 

monitor the ransomware samples, generating detailed 

behavioral reports for subsequent processing and feature 

extraction. The implem entation was performed using Python 

3.10.12, utilizing a comprehensive suite of libraries for deep 

learning, classical machine learning, data processing, and 

visualization. TensorFlow and Keras were used to design, 

train, and evaluate the deep learning mod els, leveraging 

pretrained architectures such as EfficientNetB0 and 

InceptionV3 for transfer learning. Scikit -learn facilitated 

classical machine learning algorithms (RF, SVM, KNN) and 

provided essential utilities for cross -validation, preprocessing, 

and performance evaluation metrics (accuracy, precision, 

recall, F1 -score, ROC, and AUC). XGBoost was used for 

gradient -boosting -based classification. NumPy and Pandas 

supported numerical operations and structured data handling, 

whereas rarfile enabled dataset extraction. Visualization tasks, 

including training curves and confusion matrices, were 

implemented using Matplotlib, Seaborn, and psutil, along with 

OS and time, which were used for runtime and resource 

utilization monitoring. 

All experiments were execute d in Google Colab Pro, 

leveraging its cloud -based infrastructure with 51 GB RAM and 

GPU acceleration (NVIDIA Tesla T4/A100) to efficiently train 

and evaluate the deep learning models. Collectively, the 

integration of the Cuckoo Sandbox for dynamic behavior 

monitoring with Python -based libraries and tools for feature 

extraction, data transformation, and model training established 

a robust end -to -end experimental pipeline for ransomware 

classification, evaluation, and result visualization. 

4.2 Evaluation metrics 

Evaluation metrics are critical for objectively quantifying the 

performance of machine learning models and providing 

standardized measures to compare models and assess their 

predictive effectiveness. These metrics provide insights into 

how well a model generalizes to unseen data and its ability to 

make accurate predictions. The primary tool employed in this 

study was a confusion matrix, which systematically evaluates 

the classification performance by comparing the predicted 

labels with the ground -truth labels. The confusion matrix 

consists of four elements: True Positives (TP), True Negatives 

(TN), False Positives (FP), and False Negatives (FN). TP and 

TN correspond to correctly identified ransomware and benign 

samples, respectively, while FP repres ents benign samples 

incorrectly classified as ransomware and FN indicates 

ransomware samples misclassified as benign. This detailed 

structure provides a clear visualization of the correct and 

incorrect classifications, serving as the foundation for derivin g

the performance metrics. From this matrix, core metrics 

including accuracy, precision, recall, F1 -score, and area under 

the ROC curve (AUC) were computed to comprehensively 

assess model performance. These metrics collectively capture 

overall correctness, detection sensitivity, misclassification 

trade -offs, and threshold -independent discrimination. Their 

formal definitions, descriptions, and equations are presented in 

Table 5.

Table 5 Evaluation metrics of the proposed approach.                                    

> Metric
> Name
> Description Related Syntax/Equation
> Accuracy The ratio of correctly
> predicted instances
> (TP and TN) to the
> total number of
> observations.
> 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 =𝑇𝑃 +𝑇𝑁
> 𝑇𝑃 +𝑇𝑁 +𝐹𝑃 +𝐹𝑁
> Precision The ratio of correctly
> predicted positive
> observations (TP) to
> the total predicted
> positives (TP + FP).
> Precision =𝑇𝑃
> 𝑇𝑃 +𝐹𝑃
> Recall
> (Sensitivity)
> The proportion of
> actual positives (TP)
> correctly identified by
> the model.
> Recall =𝑇𝑃
> 𝑇𝑃 +𝐹𝑁
> F1 -Score The harmonic mean of
> precision and recall,
> balancing false
> positives and false
> negatives.
> F1 -measure= 2×𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ×𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
> 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 +𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
> AUC (Area
> Under ROC
> Curve)
> Evaluates classifier
> performance across
> thresholds; higher
> values indicate
> stronger separability.
> Derived from ROC curve (TPR
> vs. FPR).

In the context of ransomware detection, these metrics are 

particularly significant, as minimizing false negatives is critical 

to prevent undetected ransomware infections, while reducing 

false positives helps avoid benign software misclassification, 

thereby enhancing the practical reliability of the pr oposed 

approach in real -world deployments 

4.3 Dataset splitting and evaluation strategy 

The final corpus consists of 1,000 behavior -derived color 

images (500 ransomware, 500 benign), each generated from the 

100 dynamic behavioral features described in Section 3 and 

transformed into a fixed -size visual representation suitable for 

CNN backbone processing. 

Model evaluation was conducted using a stratified 5 -fold 

cross -validation (CV) protocol on the entire dataset to obtain an 

unbiased estimate of the generalizat ion performance. In each 

fold, the dataset was partitioned suc h that 80% of the samples 

(four folds) were used exclusively for training, and the 

rem aining 20% (one fold) served as the hold -out validation set. 

Class stratification preserved the 1:1 ransomware –benign ratio 

in both training and validation splits. This process was repeated 

five times so that each sample appeared in the validation set 

exactly once, and in the training set , four times across folds. All 

reported metrics represent the mean ± standard deviation of the 

five validation runs. 

In each cross -validation fold, the classifier is trained on the 

fold’s training split with per -sample weights determined by an 

RL agent. The agent assigns these weigh ts prior to model 

fitting, guiding the classifier to focus on informative samples. 

Evaluation was performed on the corresponding test split, and 

the mean ± standard deviation of the accuracy, precision, recall, 

F1 -score, and AUC were reported across folds. Predictions from all folds were combined to produce aggregate confusion 

matrices and ROC curves, providing a clear overview of the 

overall classification performance. 

4.4 Experimental evaluation 

This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the 

proposed TL -RL -FusionNet, which integrates dual -CNN 

feature extraction with a lightweight RL -guided residual MLP 

classifier for efficient decision -making. The framework was 

benchmarked against six baseline classifiers: RF, XGBoost, 

SVM, LR, CNN, and ANN, e ach evaluated with and without 

RL -based sample weighting. 

The evaluation followed a multi -step process. 

1. Cross -validation performance and visualization of 

classification metrics via confusion matrices and ROC curves 

2. Computational efficiency analysis in terms of 

execution time and memory usage. 

3. Post -hoc model interpretability analysis using t -SNE 

and Grad -CAM visualizations 

4. Comparison with related studies to contextualize the 

results. 

The findings, supported by detailed figures and tables, 

demonst rate the robustness, efficiency, and practical 

applicability of TL -RL -FusionNet for ransomware detection. 

Notably, the RL -enhanced residual MLP achieved the highest 

performance, surpassing all baseline models and their RL -free 

counterparts. 

4.4.1 Cross -va lidation performance 

This subsection evaluates all classifiers under the RL -guided 

sample weighting and baseline configurations. The analysis 

combined statistical metrics, confusion matrix patterns, and 

ROC curve assessments. This evaluation provides a

co mprehensive view of the classification behavior of each 

model by comparing the detection accuracy, error distribution, 

and sensitivity -specificity trade -offs in ransomware detection. 

Classification performance of all classifiers, with and 

without RL -guided sample weighting : The cross -validation 

results for all classifiers, evaluated with and without RL -guided 

sample weighting, are summarized in  Table 6, while the 

corresponding relative accuracy improvements are visualized 

Fi g. 4. The performance metrics, reported as mean ± standard 

deviation o ver five folds, included accuracy, precision, recall, 

F1 -score, and AUC. This study used accuracy as the primary 

evaluation metric because of its central role in assessing 

ransomware detection performance, whereas the other metrics 

were reported to provide a more complete evaluation. The 

results demonstrate that the RL -guided sample weighting 

consistently enhances the performance of most classifiers. The 

proposed RL -enhanced residual MLP achieved the highest 

overall performance, attaining an accuracy of 99. 10% and an 

F1 -score of 99.11%, outperforming its non -RL counterpart 

(98.80% accuracy, 98.81% F1 -score). RL integration also 

improved recall (99.60% vs. 99.20%) and AUC (99.74% vs. 

99.72%), indicating superior sensitivity and stronger class 

separability. Similar gains were observed for CNN, ANN, RF, 

and XGBoost, whereas SVM exhibited negligible 

improvement, likely because of its limited adaptability to 

dynamic sample weighting in high -dimensional spaces .                                                                                          

> Table 6Cross -validation performance of all classifiers with and without RL -guided sample weighting, showing mean ± standard deviation for accuracy,
> precision, recall, F1 -score, and AU
> Model RL/Without RL Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score AUC
> MLP With RL 0.9910 ± 0.0108 0.9863 ± 0.0163 0.9960 ± 0.0055 0.9911 ± 0.0107 0.9974 ± 0.0042
> Without RL 0.9880 ± 0.0045 0.9843 ± 0.0111 0.9920 ± 0.0084 0.9881 ± 0.0044 0.9972 ± 0.0030
> CNN With RL 0.984 ± 0.0082 0.9803 ± 0.0137 0.988 ± 0.0130 0.9841 ± 0.0082 0.9975 ± 0.0020
> Without RL 0.983 ± 0.0045 0.9842 ± 0.0112 0.982 ± 0.0130 0.9830 ± 0.0045 0.9979 ± 0.0019
> ANN With RL 0.9820 ± 0.0084 0.9764 ± 0.0109 0.9880 ± 0.0110 0.9821 ± 0.0083 0.9950 ± 0.0049
> Without RL 0.9810 ± 0.0108 0.9728 ± 0.0185 0.9900 ± 0.0100 0.9812 ± 0.0107 0.9955 ± 0.0043
> LR With RL 0.9800 ± 0.0094 0.9744 ± 0.0111 0.986 ± 0.0134 0.9801 ± 0.0093 0.9948 ± 0.0050
> Without RL 0.9790 ± 0.0082 0.9744 ± 0.0111 0.9840 ± 0.0114 0.9791 ± 0.0082 0.9946 ± 0.0039
> XGBoost With RL 0.9780 ± 0.0057 0.9784 ± 0.0185 0.9780 ± 0.0084 0.9781 ± 0.0054 0.9962 ± 0.0034
> Without RL 0.9760 ± 0.0065 0.9708 ± 0.0189 0.9820 ± 0.0130 0.9762 ± 0.0063 0.9961 ± 0.0033
> RF With RL 0.9770 ± 0.0084 0.9651 ± 0.0155 0.9900 ± 0.0100 0.9773 ± 0.0081 0.9957 ± 0.0044
> Without RL 0.974 ± 0.0082 0.9650 ± 0.0155 0.984 ± 0.0114 0.9743 ± 0.0081 0.9956 ± 0.0038
> SVM With RL 0.9660 ± 0.0055 0.9534 ± 0.0075 0.9800 ± 0.0122 0.9665 ± 0.0055 0.9888 ± 0.0092
> Without RL 0.9660 ± 0.0055 0.9534 ± 0.0075 0.9800 ± 0.0122 0.9665 ± 0.0055 0.9888 ± 0.0092

To better understand the classification behavior of the 

evaluated models, fold -aggregated confusion matrices were 

generated for each baseline and RL -guided variant ( Table 7). 

Each matrix reports the counts of true positives (TP), true 

negatives (TN), false positives (FP), and fal se negatives (FN) 

for ransomware and benign classes. A comparative inspection 

revealed that the RL -guided models consistently reduced the 

number of false negatives across most classifiers while 

maintaining similar or lower false -positive counts. This 

sugge sts that the RL weighting improves decision calibration in 

borderline classification cases, leading to more robust 

detection. For example, both the RL -augmented CNN and ANN 

demonstrate a notable reduction in FN instances compared to 

their non -RL counterpar ts, which is particularly critical in 

ransomware detection, where missed threats pose severe risks. 

The most significant improvement was observed in the 

proposed RL -MLP model, which achieved the lowest 

misclassification rate across all the tested models. Specifically, 

it recorded only three ransomware instances misclassified as 

benign (FN) and six benign instances misclassified as 

ransomware (FP), yielding an overall accuracy of 99.10%. In 

contrast, its non -RL counterpart recorded four FN and eight FP 

cases , corresponding to a slightly lower accuracy of 98.80%. 

These results highlight the ability of RL -guided weighting to 

emphasize hard -to -classify samples, thereby strengthening the 

discriminative boundary between ransomware and benign 

samples. 

Threshold -based discriminative performance using ROC 

curves : To further evaluate the threshold -based discrimination 

capability, Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves 

were generated for all models. As shown in  Fig . 5, the ROC 

analysis, aggregated over all five cross -validation folds, 

provides a comprehensive view of the model discrimination 

performance across diverse data s plits. By pooling fold -wise 

predictions, we ensured that the computed AUC values 

captured the average behavior of the model rather than being 

biased by any single fold. The proposed TL -RL -FusionNet 

framework, particularly the RL -weighted MLP, CNN, and tre e-

based ensembles, demonstrated an AUC of ≈ 1.00, indicating 

almost perfect separability between ransomware and benign 

samples. The tight clustering of the ROC curves near the top -

left corner reinforces the models’ ability to maintain high 

sensitivity with negligible false positives, which is critical for 

operational ransomware detection. Furthermore, the 

consistency of these results with the unseen test set evaluation 

(AUC ≈ 0.99) underscores the reliability and generalization 

capacity of the proposed fram ework. This confirms that the 

integration of reinforcement learning -driven sample weighting 

with dual -CNN feature fusion not only improves the 

classification accuracy but also stabilizes the performance 

across folds, reducing the variance and overfitting r isk.          

> Fi g. 4.Accuracy comparison of models with and without RL -guided sample weighting. RL -enhanced models show improvements across classifiers,
> with proposed MLP achieving best performance. The comparison demonstrates RL -guided adaptive sample weighting's effectiveness in prioritizing
> hard -to -classify instances, reducing overfitting and enhancing generalization. In ransomware detection, improved recall is crucial as it reduces false
> negatives and undetected threats. Table 7Aggregated confusion matrices for all classifiers with and
> without RL -guided sample weighting, illustrating the distribution of
> TP, TN, FP, and FN counts. The RL -guided MLP configuration
> achieved the most optimal results, underscoring the benefit of dynamic
> weighting through reinforcement learning.
> Model
> Name
> Confusion matrix
> with RL
> Confusion matrix without
> RL
> MLP
> (Propo
> sed)
> CNN
> ANN
> LR
> XGBo
> ost
> RF
> SVM

4.4.2 Computational efficiency evaluation 

In addition to predictive accuracy, computational efficiency 

is an essential requirement for ransomware detection systems, 

especially in environments with limited resources or those that 

require real -time processing. Therefore, we evaluated the 

efficiency in terms of training time, inference time, and memory 

usage (RAM) across all classifiers under both RL -guided and 

non -RL training schemes. The results are summarized in  Table 

8 and visualized in  Fig . 6. and  Fig. 7.

Timing performance analysis ( training and inference time): 

Across nearly all models, RL -guided sample weighting resulted 

in shorter training times and faster inference than non -RL 

counterpa rts, as illustrated in Fig. 6 (a) and 6 (b). For instance, 

the training time for CNN decreased from 76.96 s to 25.49 s, 

representing a 67% reduction. Similarly, the MLP and ANN 

exhibited significant reductions in training time, from 16.70 s 

to 13.78 s for MLP, and from 4.97 s to 4.15 s for ANN. As 

shown in Fig. 9, the inference time differences between the RL 

and non -RL variants were relatively minor across all models. 

The proposed MLP achieved an inference time of 0.23 s with 

RL, compared to 0.36 s without RL, and the CNN inference 

time decreased from 0.28 s to 0.164 s. Lightweight classifiers, 

such as XGBoost, RF, and LR, maintained inference times 

below 0.04 s, affirming their appropriateness for low -latency 

applications.   

> Fig .5.ROC curves for all models were evaluated using cross -validated
> training data. The curves illustrate the trade -off between the true and false
> positive rates across the classification thresholds. MLP, CNN, RF, and
> XGBoost achieve d perfect separability (AUC = 1.00), while ANN, SVM,
> and LR followed closely with AUC = 0.99. The results confirmed the high
> sensitivity and specificity of the model, particularly those augmented by
> reinforcement learning.

Table 8 Computational efficiency comparison of all models with and without RL -guided sample weighting, including average training time, inference 

time, and memory usage (RAM) across five -folds.                                                                        

> Model RL/Without RL Train Time (s) Inference Time (s) Train RAM (MB) Inference RAM (MB)
> MLP With RL 13.78 ± 0.13 0.23 ± 0.01 73.80 ± 48.36 0.66 ± 1.44
> Without RL 16.70 ± 0.38 0.36 ± 0.03 89.55 ± 70.97 2.73 ± 1.81
> CNN With RL 25.494 ± 0.4676 0.164 ± 0.0055 163.488 ± 67.0153 6.21 ± 5.59
> Without RL 76.960 ± 1.3843 0.280 ± 0.0224 223.318 ± 75.6966 15.258 ± 12.7609
> ANN With RL 4.15 ± 0.10 0.11 ± 0.01 17.30 ± 23.44 3.16 ± 2.10
> Without RL 4.97 ± 0.12 0.16 ± 0.03 44.56 ± 49.24 3.24 ± 2.15
> LR With RL 3.044 ± 0.4058 0.034 ± 0.0114 0.156 ± 0.1424 0.000 ± 0.0000
> Without RL 3.95 ± 0.49 0.04 ± 0.01 0.55 ± 0.67 0.00 ± 0.00
> XGBoost With RL 3.71 ± 0.63 0.01 ± 0.00 12.39 ± 25.84 0.000 ± 0.0000
> Without RL 4.696 ± 0.6352 0.010 ± 0.0000 18.488 ± 35.2322 0.050 ± 0.1118
> RF With RL 1.75 ± 0.08 0.01 ± 0.00 0.05 ± 0.12 0.00 ± 0.00
> Without RL 2.280 ± 0.0800 0.020 ± 0.0000 0.088 ± 0.1968 0.000 ± 0.0000
> SVM With RL 1.80 ± 0.06 0.24 ± 0.01 6.17 ± 13.36 0.02 ± 0.05
> Without RL 2.07 ± 0.03 0.31 ± 0.01 7.03 ± 10.92 0.51 ± 1.14

Memory usage 

Fig . 7 (a) and Fig. 7 (b) show the RAM usage during the training 

and inference phases, respectively. During training, the 

application of RL -guided weighting significantly reduced the 

memory overhead by preventing redundant updates, as 

evidenced in the cases of CNN (223 MB reduced to 163 MB) 

and ANN (44 MB reduced to 17 MB). In the inference phase, 

the RL -weighted MLP reduces memory consumption from 2.73 

MB (non -RL) to 0.66 MB (RL), whereas CNN shows the 

largest drop, from 15.26 to 6.21 MB. The ANN usag e declines 

slightly from 3.24 to 3.16 MB, XGBoost maintains a negligible 

footprint (0.05 to 0.00 MB), and SVM decreases from 0.51 to 

0.02 MB. LR and RF require no additional memory in either 

configuration (0.00 MB). Although some models exhibit lower 

memor y usage, their accuracies are significantly lower than 

those of the optimized MLP. The RL -weighted MLP offers the 

best trade -off, combining high accuracy with low RAM 

inference consumption. 

These results highlight an important finding: rather than 

incurring additional computational overhead, our lightweight 

tabular Q -learning agent improves both efficiency and accuracy 

through its sample reweighting mechanism. During training, the 

agent down -weights easy samples, such as benign applications 

that perform only basic file I/O operations or ransomware 

families with obvious, repetitive encryption behaviors that are 

consistently classified with high confidence. By emphasizing 

harder or misclassifie d cases, the agent reduces redundant 

gradient updates on easy samples, effectively lowering the 

number of costly backpropagation operations without reducing 

the dataset size. Consequently, the models converge faster and 

require fewer resources during train ing. 

At inference, no reinforcement learning (RL) component is 

executed. The improved efficiency observed here is therefore 

an indirect effect of better -calibrated models trained with RL 

Fig . 6. Training and inference time comparison of ransomware detection models with and without RL -guided sample weighting. (a) Training time in 

seconds and (b) inference time in seconds across seven classifiers (SVM, RF, XGBoost, LR, ANN, CNN, and MLP). RL integration significantly 

accelerates convergence in deep models (e.g., CNN and MLP) while maintaining or improving inference efficiency across all mod els. weighting: predictions are more stable and memory allocation 

is more efficient, leading to faster and lighter inference. 

Overall, the RL -guided sample weighting not only enhances 

the detection robustness but also improves the computational 

efficiency. By streamlining the training dynamics and 

stabilizing the inference behavior, the lightweight Q -learning 

agent enables faster convergence, lower memory usage, and 

reduced computational cost without introducing overhead. 

These findings underscore the novelty of TL -RL -FusionNet and 

reinforce its dep loyability in scenarios where both high 

accuracy and resource efficiency are essential. 

4.4.3 Model interpretability analysis 

To ensure that the model predictions are not only accurate but 

also explainable, a series of interpretability techniques were 

applied to the RL -enhanced classifiers. This section explores 

two key aspects of model performance: the distribution of 

learned features and the explainability of its decision -making 

process. First, we visualized the learne d feature space using t -

SNE to assess how well the model differentiates between 

ransomware and benign samples. Second, we employed 

Gradient -weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad -CAM) to 

provide insights into the specific image regions that influence 

the model’s decisions. By analyzing these aspects, we aim to 

provide a comprehensive view of both the global feature 

distribution and localized decision cues, enhancing our 

understanding of the model’s robust and discriminative 

behavior on unseen data .

Featu re space visualization and misclassified analysis using 

t-SNE : To gain deeper insights into the internal representation 

of the learned features, t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor 

Embedding (t -SNE) visualization was applied to the final test 

set features. 

As illustrated in Fig. 8, the two -dimensional projection reveals 

a clear separation between the ransomware (R) and benign (B) 

classes. Although some samples appear near the decision 

boundary, the majority form distinct and compact clusters, 

indicating the effectiveness of the feature extraction and 

learning pipeline in capturing class -specific representations. 

This implies that the proposed RL -enhanced MLP model is 

capable of learning well -generalized decision boundaries. The 

ransomware samples (green) tende d to aggregate into distinct 

regions, whereas the benign samples (orange) formed compact, 

isolated clusters. This visual separation supports the model’s 

effectiveness in capturing high -level discriminative patterns 

from behavior -transformed image features, enhancing 

classification confidence and interpretabil ity. 

To further investigate the model decision boundaries, we 

applied t -distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t -SNE)   

> Fig. 7.RAM usage comparison of ransomware detection models with and without RL -guided sample weighting. (a) Training R AM usage and (b)
> inference RAM usage in megabytes across seven classifiers. RL -guided models consistently reduce memory overhead, with the most pronounced
> efficiency gains observed in CNN and MLP, demonstrating the framework’s suitability for resource -cons trained or real -time environments.

Fig . 8. t-SNE plot of  the  final test set features. This plot shows  a 2D             

> projection of the learned features .Green and orange points represent
> ransomware (R) and benign (B) samples, respectively. The formation of
> distinct clusters indicates strong feature separability with minimal class
> overlap, reinforcing the model's ability to learn discriminative
> representat ions for accurate classificat ion .

to project high -dimensional feature representations into two -

and three -dimensional spaces (Fig . 9). In both projections, the 

correctly classified samples (blue) formed distinct clusters, 

reflecting the model’s ability to effectively separate classes. 

Misclassified benign samples (green, FP) and ransomwar e

samples (red, FN) tended to cluster near the decision boundary, 

indicating that these cases shared feature similarities with the 

opposite class. The 3D visualization further highlights that 

misclassifications occur in overlapping regions where class 

boun daries are less distinct. Overall, the combined confusion 

matrix and t -SNE analyses confirmed that the RL -guided 

adaptive weighting enhanced the reliability of ransomware 

detection by minimizing high -impact false negatives and 

improving separation in ambig uous regions of the feature space. 

These findings demonstrate the robustness of the RL -MLP in 

handling adversarially evasive ransomware behaviors while 

maintaining generalization to benign software. 

.

Saliency map analysis using Grad -CAM 

To improve interpretability, we employed Gradient -weighted 

Class Activation Mapping (Grad -CAM) to visualize which 

parts of the feature -to -image representations influenced model 

predictions. Grad -CAM is important because it makes the 

model’s “reasoning” more transparent, showing whether 

decisions are based on meaningful behavioral patterns rathe r

than random noise. 

As shown in  Fig . 10 , the benign sample displayed diffuse 

activations, suggesting no single dominant feature group, 

whereas the ransomware sample exhibited more localized 

hotspots . Because each image region corre sponds to feature 

categories such as file operations, registry edits, or network 

activity, these focused activations indicate that the model relies 

on ransomware -relevant behaviors. This is particularly 

important for detecting polymorphic and mutating rans omware, 

where surface -level code changes vary, but the underlying 

behaviors (e.g., file encryption and registry modification) 

remain consistent. 

Thus, Grad -CAM not only validates that our model learns the 

correct cues but also strengthens trust in its abil ity to generalize 

across diverse ransomware families. 

4.4.4 Comparison with existing relevant methods 

To further evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed TL -RL -

FusionNet framework, we benchmarked its performance 

against ransomware detection techniques from the literature 

that also combined pretrained CNN feature extractors with 

separate classifiers. The comparative results are presented in 

Table 9. It is important to note that the studies listed in Table 6 

differ substantially in terms of datasets, feature engineering 

approaches (e.g., static, dynamic, or hybrid analysis), and 

targeted malware families or versions. Consequently, the results 

should be inter preted as contextual benchmarks across related 

methodologies, rather than a direct head -to -head evaluation.            

> Fig .9.Visualization of misclassified samples for the RL -MLP model using t -SNE. (a) 2D t -SNE projection and (b) 3D t -SNE projection. The c orrectly
> classified samples appear in blue, false positives (benign misclassified as ransomware) appear in green, and false negatives (ransomware misclassified
> as benign) appear in red. The figures show that samples form distinct clusters, wh ereas misclassified instances lie near decision boundaries, highlighting
> the inherent ambiguity of these samp les.

Fig . 10 . Grad -CAM heatmaps  show visual saliency maps for benign             

> and ransomware inputs, highlighting influential classification
> regions. RGB image regions correspond to behavioral features (file
> operations, registry edits, and network activity) with distinct
> activation patterns. Ran somware heatmaps show hotspots in file and
> registry activities, whereas benign samples display diffuse patterns,
> confirming the model's focus on ransomware behavior.

Our method is based on a custom, balanced, threat -informed 

dynamic behavioral dataset, whereas most prior studies rely 

primarily o n static binary features, memory dumps, and hybrid 

data sources .

Table 9 Comparison of the proposed TL -RL -FusionNet framework with existing ransomware detection methods employing pretrained CNN feature extractors paired                                                                

> with separate classifiers. The results highlight the superior performance of the proposed RL -enhanced Residual Lightweight MLP classifier, which combines dynamic -
> to -image feature transformation with RL -guided sample weighting.
> Ref. Analysis
> Technique
> Feature
> Ex tractor(s)
> RL -based
> Sample
> Weighting
> Classifier Accuracy
> (%)
> Training
> Time (s)
> Prediction
> Time (s)
> Memory
> Usage
> (MB)
> False
> Positive
> (%)
> False
> Negative
> (%)
> [14 ]Static DenseNet -121 No XGBoost 98.58 –––––
> [15 ]Static VGG -16 +
> ResNet50
> No Bi -KNN 99.00 18.928 ––––
> [13 ]Static VGG16,
> VGG19,
> ResNet50,
> InceptionV3
> No MLP 98.55 –0.471 –––
> [16 ]Static VGG -16 No SVM 92.97 –––––
> [21 ]Static -No DRL (A2C,
> DQN,
> DDQN,
> PPO)
> 89.78 with
> A2C
> 168.27 0.76
> [31 ]Dynamic --FL and RL Above
> 98%
> ---
> Our
> method
> (TL -RL -
> FusionNet)
> Dynamic EfficientNetB0
> + InceptionV3
> Yes RL -
> enhanced
> Residual
> MLP
> 99.10 13.90 0.23 0.66 0.70 0.20

Furthermore, while previous studies have demonstrated 

competitive accuracy, such as 99% with VGG -16 + ResNet50 

using Bi -KNN [15] or 98.58% with DenseNet -121 and 

XGBoost [14 ], none have incorporated a RL -based sample 

weighting mechanism. In contrast, the study in [21 ] introduced 

Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) models such as A2C, 

DQN, DDQN, and PPO for static ransomware detection; 

however, their best performance (A2C = 89.78%) was notably 

lower, with long training durations (168 s) and moderate 

inference latency (0.76 s). The more recent CyberForce 

framework [31] extended RL into a federated dynamic 

environment, integrating FL with RL for decentralized 

malware mitigation and achieving above 98% accuracy. 

Nevertheless, Cy berForce primarily targets adaptive defense 

strategies in IoT networks rather than direct ransomware 

classification. 

In comparison , our proposed TL -RL -FusionNet, 

incorporating an RL -enhanced Residual Lightweight MLP 

classifier, achieved 99.1% accuracy, a 0.70% false -positive 

rate, and a 0.20% false -negative rate, with an average inference 

memory footprint of only 0.66 MB and prediction latency of 

0.156 s. To the best of our knowledge, no prior study has 

employed a dynamic -to -image transformation pipeline 

combined with RL -guided transfer learning for ransomware 

detection, making our contribution novel in terms of both 

methodology and performance. 

Moreover, none of the compared studies reported both false -

positive and false -negative rates, which are highly r elevant in 

cybersecurity contexts. False negatives are particularly critical 

because they correspond to undetected threats that can bypass 

the defenses. The extremely low false -negative rate achieved by 

TL -RL -FusionNet underscores its operational reliabili ty. In 

addition, the compared studies do not address computational 

efficiency in terms of inference memory usage and do not 

perform model interpretability analyses. Our framework 

addresses these gaps through t -SNE -based visualization of 

learned feature spa ces and Grad -CAM saliency mapping to 

identify decision -critical regions for both benign and 

ransomware samples. 

TL -RL -FusionNet outperforms existing approaches in terms 

of accuracy and robustness while providing computational 

efficiency and interpretability, making it deployable for 

ransomware detection in IoT and edge devices. 

5. Discussion 

This section discusses the experimental findings of TL -RL -

FusionNet, highlighting the importance of reinforcement 

learning, its influence on the results, and the advancements of 

the framework over prior studies. It then outlines the scientific 

and practical implications, acknowledges key limitations with 

future directions, and ends with a takeaway underscoring RL as 

the defining factor that makes T L-RL -FusionNet adaptive and 

deployable. 

Ransomware is increasingly engineered to evade detection 

by altering behaviors or mimicking benign activity. In this 

setting, static weighting of training samples is insufficient 

because it treats all data points as equally informative. The 

central contribution of this study is demonstrating that 

reinforcement learning (RL) directly addresses this limitation 

by adaptively reweighting training samples .

The RL agent enhanced the framework by dynamically 

reweighting samp les: misclassified or challenging cases were 

assigned higher weights, whereas trivial, consistently correct 

cases were down -weighted. This dynamic prioritization 

improved the classifier’s ability to learn from deceptive 

behaviors such as registry edits, su btle file -system operations, 

and suspicious network traffic. Although RL operated at the sample level rather than individual features, the indirect effect 

was that these high -risk behavioral categories received greater 

influence during training. This mecha nism improves the 

calibration around difficult decision boundaries and reduces 

high -impact errors. As shown in the fold -aggregated confusion 

matrices (Table 7), the RL -guided MLP achieved only three 

false negatives and six false positives (compared with fo ur FN 

and eight FP without RL). This corresponds to a measurable 

reduction in the error rates (0.30% FN, 0.70% FP), which are 

critical for reliable ransomware detection. Moreover, by 

consistently highlighting misclassified or borderline cases, the 

RL agent improved its resilience against polymorphism and 

feature obfuscation. Simultaneously, interpretability analyses 

further reinforced operational trust: t -distributed stochastic 

neighbor embedding projections showed clear class separation 

and identified misc lassified samples, gradient -weighted class 

activation mapping highlighted semantically meaningful 

behavioral cues, and confusion matrices documented low FN 

rates , underscoring the framework’s reliability in minimizing 

undetected threats. Together, these re sults highlight the dual 

value of TL -RL -FusionNet: it is both effective and trustworthy. 

Previous research on RL in malware detection has largely 

focused on static features such as portable executable headers 

[19 ], Android permissions [21 ], and Bayesian vulnerability 

modelling [20 ] or relied on pretrained CNNs without adaptive 

weighting or efficiency profiling [14 ], [15 ], [16 ]. Additionally, 

our previous work [18 ] employe d full end -to -end fine -tuning of 

multiple CNN backbones (ResNet50, EfficientNetB0, 

InceptionV3, Xception, and VGG), achieving near -perfect 

accuracy (99.96% with ResNet50) on color -transformed 

dynamic features. However, this approach incurs substantial 

comp utational costs owing to backpropagation across millions 

of parameters, resulting in prolonged training times and high 

memory consumption. TL -RL -FusionNet advances the field by 

freezing EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3 as feature extractors 

and introducing RL -guided sample weighting with a residual 

MLP classifier. This approach retains an accuracy above 98 –

99% while reducing the training time by approximately 45 –

55% and memory use by approximately 70 –80%. In doing so, 

it directly addresses one of the key wea knesses of our earlier 

work: computational efficiency. Compared to the baseline 

models without RL weighting, TL -RL -FusionNet achieved 

consistently higher performance across accuracy, precision, 

recall, and AUC. Classical machine learning models such as 

RF, SVM, and XGBoost showed modest gains, but the largest 

improvements appeared in deep learning models, where RL 

weighting stabilized training and sharpened decision 

boundaries. 

The findings show that reinforcement learning can serve as a 

practical mechanism for guiding deep learning models in 

security contexts. More broadly, the principle of adaptive 

sample weighting can be applied across domains where difficult 

edge cases carry the greatest risks, including fraud analysis and 

healthcare diagnostics. In addi tion, by combining frozen 

pretrained backbones with RL -guided adaptivity, TL -RL -

FusionNet achieves a rare balance of accuracy, efficiency, and 

interpretability. This efficiency has direct practical 

implications: the framework can operate effectively in 

resource -constrained environments such as IoT devices, edge 

systems, or mobile platforms, where computational and 

memory budgets are limited but robust detection remains 

essential. 

Despite its contributions, the TL -RL -FusionNet has some 

limitations . First , although the RL weighting improved 

robustness, it was not a complete defense. Persistently 

misclassified poisoning samples may still be repeatedly up 

weighted, reinforcing incorrect decision boundaries, and 

adversarial behaviors carefully engineered to mimic benign 

activity could still bypass detection . Moreover, adversarial 

robustness was not explicitly tested in this study , representing a 

promising direction for future validation under adversarially 

controlled environments Second, the evaluation was con ducted 

on a balanced dataset of 1,000 samples curated from recent 

ransomware families . Although this mitigated class imbalance 

and ensured representativeness, larger and more diverse 

datasets are required to comprehensively assess scalability and 

robustnes s. Although representative, larger, and more diverse 

datasets are required to confirm the scalability across families 

and execution environments. Third, the reinforcement learning 

component employs a tabular Q -learning agent with discrete 

weight actions. Although effective in this context, such agents 

may be less adaptable in complex feature spaces than more 

advanced RL methods, limiting their generalization potential. 

These limitations open clear avenues for future research. 

In summary, reinforcement learn ing is the key to making TL -

RL -FusionNet adaptive. It shifts the training process away from 

static, one -size -fits -all learning and toward a targeted focus on 

the cases most likely to evade detection. This ability to combine 

high accuracy, low error rates, and practical efficiency positions 

TL -RL -FusionNet as a credible foundation for next -generation 

ransomware detection and as a steppingstone for future 

advances in adaptive security AI. 

6. Conclusion and future work 

This study demonstrated that the evolving behavior of 

ransomware requires adaptive detection strategies beyond 

static weighting. TL -RL -FusionNet addressed this by using 

reinforcement learning to reweight challenging samples, such 

as subtle file -system operations, registry edits, and suspicious 

network traffic, thereby reducing critical misclassifications, 

improving resilience against evasion, and maintaining high 

accuracy, efficiency, and interpretability. By integrating frozen 

dual C NN backbones (EfficientNetB0 and InceptionV3) with 

a residual MLP classifier and an RL -based weighting agent, 

TL -RL -FusionNet achieved a principled balance between the 

predictive performance and computational efficiency. Across 

stratified 5 -fold cross -vali dation, the framework consistently 

outperformed classical machine learning and deep learning 

baselines, attaining 99.10% accuracy, 99.11% F1 -score, and 

99.74% AUC, while maintaining false positives at 0.70% and 

false negatives at 0.20%. Efficiency profilin g further showed 

reductions of approximately 45 –55% in training time and 

approximately 70 –80% in memory use compared with end -to -

end fine -tuning, confirming its suitability for resource -

constrained environments such as IoT devices, edge systems, 

and mobile platforms. Interpretability analyses using t-

distributed stochastic neighbor embedding and gradient -weighted class activation mapping verified that the model 

captured semantically meaningful behavioral patterns, 

reinforcing trust in its operational reliab ility. Despite these 

strengths, the framework has limitations, such as the fact that 

adversarial robustness was not explicitly tested, leaving open 

the possibility that poisoning or mimicry attacks could bypass 

detection. In addition, the dataset size was modest, and the RL 

agent was limited to the tabular Q -learning. 

Future research should focus on promising directions. First, 

enhancing adversarial robustness is a key priority. 

Incorporating adversarial training strategies, ensemble 

defenses, and RL -guide d mechanisms can strengthen 

resilience against poisoning and mimicry attacks and ensure 

reliability in adversarially controlled environments. Second, 

scaling the evaluation to larger and more diverse datasets will 

be essential to validate the effectiveness of the framework 

against a wider spectrum of ransomware families and 

polymorphic variants. Third, exploring more advanced 

reinforcement learning algorithms may refine adaptive sample 

weighting, improve generalization in complex feature spaces, 

and further reduce the number of high -impact 

misclassifications. 

In conclusion, TL -RL -FusionNet demonstrates how 

reinforcement learning can transform transfer learning into an 

adaptive and efficient strategy for ransomware detection. Its 

high accuracy while minimizin g costs and enhancing 

interpretability establishes it as a foundation for deployable 

cybersecurity solutions and resilient AI -driven defenses 

against threats. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Jannatul Ferdous: Conceptualization, Methodology, Python 

Scripting, Investigation of experimental results, Writing –

original draft, and Visualization. Rafiqul Islam : Validation, 

Writing – review and editing, supervision. Arash Mahboubi :

Validation, Writing – review & edit ing, Supervision. Md 

Zahidul Islam: Validation, Writing – review & editing, 

Supervision. 

Conflicts of interest : The authors declare no conflicts of 

interest. 

Funding : This work was supported by Charles Sturt University 

(CSU) PhD funding. Project Operating Fund. 

Data availability : Data will be made available on request 

References 

[1] J. Ferdous, R. Islam, A. Mahboubi, and M. Z. Islam, “AI -

based Ransomware Detection: A Comprehensive Review,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 12, no. September, 2024, doi: 

10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3461965. 

[2] E. Ruellan, M. Paquet -Clouston, and S. Garcia, “Conti Inc.: 

unders tanding the internal discussions of a large ransomware -

as -a-service operator with machine learning,” Crime Sci. , vol. 

13, no. 1, pp. 1 –13, 2024, doi: 10.1186/s40163 -024 -00212 -y. 

[3] J. Ferdous, R. Islam, A. Mahboubi, and M. Z. Islam, “AI -

based Ransomware D etection: A Comprehensive Review,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 12, no. September, pp. 136666 –136695, 

2024, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3461965. 

[4] E. C. L. Daniele Sgandurra, Luis Muñoz -González, Rabih 

Mohsen, “Automated Dynamic Analysis of Ransomware: 

Benefits, Limit ations and use for Detection,” arXiv Prepr. 

arXiv1609.03020 , 2016, [Online]. Available: 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.03020. 

[5] J. Singh, K. Sharma, M. Wazid, and A. K. Das, “SINN -RD: 

Spline interpolation -envisioned neural network -based 

ransomware detection scheme,” Comput. Electr. Eng. , vol. 

106, no. March, p. 108601, 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.compeleceng.2023.108601. 

[6] U. Zahoora, A. Khan, M. Rajarajan, S. H. Khan, M. Asam, 

and T. Jamal, “Ransomware detection using deep learning 

based unsupervised feature extr action and a cost sensitive 

Pareto Ensemble classifier,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1 –

15, 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -022 -19443 -7. 

[7] D. W. Fernando, N. Komninos, and T. Chen, “A Study on the 

Evolution of Ransomware Detection Using Machine 

Learning and Deep Learning Techniques,” IoT , vol. 1, no. 2, 

pp. 551 –604, 2020, doi: 10.3390/iot1020030. 

[8] T. Lin and R. Lin, “Efficient Ransomware Detection in 

Resource -Constrained Environments Using Optimized Multi -

Layer Perceptron Networks,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, n o. April, 

pp. 84153 –84169, 2025, doi: 

10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3569184. 

[9] A. Bensaoud and J. Kalita, “CNN -LSTM and transfer 

learning models for malware classification based on opcodes 

and API calls,” Knowledge -Based Syst. , vol. 290, no. 

February, p. 111543, 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.knosys.2024.111543. 

[10] D. Vasan, M. Alazab, S. Wa ssan, B. Safaei, and Q. Zheng, 

“Image -Based malware classification using ensemble of 

CNN architectures (IMCEC),” Comput. Secur. , vol. 92, p. 

101748, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2020.101748. 

[11] C. C. Moreira, D. C. Moreira, and C. de S. d. Sales, 

“Improving ransomware detection based on portable 

executable header using xception convolutional neural 

network,” Comput. Secur. , vol. 130, p. 103265, 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.cose.2023.103265. 

[12] D. Vasan, M. Alazab, S. Wassan, H. Naeem, B. Safaei, and 

Q. Zheng, “IMC FN: Image -based malware classification 

using fine -tuned convolutional neural network architecture,” 

Comput. Networks , vol. 171, no. January, p. 107138, 2020, 

doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107138. 

[13] S. Kumar and K. Panda, “SDIF -CNN: Stacking deep image 

feat ures using fine -tuned convolution neural network models 

for real -world malware detection and classification,” Appl. 

Soft Comput. , vol. 146, p. 110676, 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110676. 

[14] S. S. H. Shah, N. Jamil, and A. ur R. Khan, “Transfer learnin g

with dual -stage discrete wavelet transform for enhanced 

visual malware image compression and classification,” J. 

Supercomput. , vol. 81, no. 8, 2025, doi: 10.1007/s11227 -025 -

07358 -9. 

[15] F. Rustam, I. Ashraf, A. D. Jurcut, A. K. Bashir, and Y. Bin 

Zikria , “Malware detection using image representation of 

malware data and transfer learning,” J. Parallel Distrib. 

Comput. , vol. 172, no. 2023, pp. 32 –50, 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.jpdc.2022.10.001. 

[16] E. Rezende, G. Ruppert, T. Carvalho, A. Theophilo, F. 

Ramos, and P. de Geus, “Malicious Software Classification 

Using VGG16 Deep Neural Network’s Bottleneck Features,” 

Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. , vol. 738, pp. 51 –59, 2018, doi: 

10.1007/978 -3-319 -77028 -4_9. 

[17] R. Chaganti, V. Ravi, and T. D. Pham, “Image -based malware 

representation approach with EfficientNet convolutional neural networks for effective malware classification,” J. Inf. 

Secur. Appl. , vol. 69, no. August, 2022, doi: 

10.1016/j.jisa.2022.103306 .

[18] J. Ferdous, R. Islam, A. Mahboubi, and Z. Islam, “A novel 

technique for ransomware detection using image based 

dynamic features and transfer learning to address dataset 

limitations,” Sci. Rep. , pp. 1 –25, 2025. 

[19] X. Z. Deng, M. C. Cen, M. Jiang, a nd M. Lu, “Ransomware 

early detection using deep reinforcement learning on portable 

executable header,” Cluster Comput. , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 

1867 –1881, 2024, doi: 10.1007/s10586 -023 -04043 -5. 

[20] J. Pre -proof et al. , “Leveraging Dynamic Embeddings and 

Rein forcement Learning with Bayesian Networks for 

Ransomware Resiliences,” Cyber Secur. Appl. , p. 100095, 

2025, doi: 10.1016/j.csa.2025.100095. 

[21] S. R. Jeremiah, H. Chen, S. Gritzalis, and J. H. Park, 

“Leveraging application permissions and network traffic 

attributes for Android ransomware detection,” J. Netw. 

Comput. Appl. , vol. 230, no. June, p. 103950, 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.jnca.2024.103950. 

[22] C. Feng, A. Huertas Celdrán, J. von der Assen, E. T. Martínez 

Beltrán, G. Bovet, and B. Stiller, “DART: A Solut ion for 

decentralized federated learning model robustness analysis,” 

Array , vol. 23, no. May, p. 100360, 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.array.2024.100360. 

[23] F. Manavi and A. Hamzeh, “Static Detection of Ransomware 

Using LSTM Network and PE Header,” 26th Int. Comp ut. 

Conf. Comput. Soc. Iran, CSICC 2021 , 2021, doi: 

10.1109/CSICC52343.2021.9420580. 

[24] F. Manavi and A. Hamzeh, “Ransomware Detection Based on 

PE Header Using Convolutional Neural Networks ∗∗ ,” 

ISeCure , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 181 –192, 2022, doi: 

10.22042/is ecure.2021.262846.595. 

[25] B. Qin, Y. Wang, and C. Ma, “API Call Based Ransomware 

Dynamic Detection Approach Using TextCNN,” Proc. - 2020 

Int. Conf. Big Data, Artif. Intell. Internet Things Eng. ICBAIE 

2020 , pp. 162 –166, 2020, doi: 

10.1109/ICBAIE49996.202 0.00041. 

[26] S. Gulmez, A. Gorgulu Kakisim, and I. Sogukpinar, “XRan: 

Explainable deep learning -based ransomware detection using 

dynamic analysis,” Comput. Secur. , vol. 139, no. January, p. 

103703, 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2024.103703. 

[27] E. M. B. Karb ab, M. Debbabi, and A. Derhab, “SwiftR: 

Cross -platform ransomware fingerprinting using hierarchical 

neural networks on hybrid features,” Expert Syst. Appl. , vol. 

225, no. April, p. 120017, 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120017. 

[28] I. Almomani, A. Alkhaye r, and W. El -Shafai, “E2E -RDS: 

Efficient End -to -End Ransomware Detection System Based 

on Static -Based ML and Vision -Based DL Approaches,” 

Sensors , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1–27, 2023, doi: 

10.3390/s23094467. 

[29] E. Rezende, G. Ruppert, T. Carvalho, F. Ramos, a nd P. De 

Geus, “Malicious software classification using transfer 

learning of ResNet -50 deep neural network,” Proc. - 16th 

IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. ICMLA 2017 , vol. 2017 -

Decem, pp. 1011 –1014, 2017, doi: 10.1109/ICMLA.2017.00 -

19. 

[30] X. Huang, L. Ma, W. Yang, and Y. Zhong, “A Method for 

Windows Malware Detection Based on Deep Learning,” J. 

Signal Process. Syst. , vol. 93, no. 2 –3, pp. 265 –273, 2021, 

doi: 10.1007/s11265 -020 -01588 -1. 

[31] C. Feng et al. , “CyberForce: A Federated Reinforcement 

Learning Framework for Malware Mitigation,” IEEE Trans. 

Dependable Secur. Comput. , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4398 –4411, 

2025, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3547005. 

[32] abuse.ch, “MalwareBazaar Database.” 

https://bazaar.abuse.ch/browse/ (accessed Jun. 02, 2024). 

[33] VirusSha re, “VirusShare.com - Because Sharing is Caring,” 

2025. https://virusshare.com/ (accessed Jun. 07, 2024). 

[34] SnapFiles, “Popular freeware categories,” 1997. 

https://www.snapfiles.com/freeware/ (accessed Jul. 06, 

2024). 

[35] Portableapps, “Portable App Directory,” 2024. 

https://portableapps.com/apps (accessed Jul. 10, 2024). 

[36] Iosifache, “DikeDataset,” 2023. 

https://github.com/iosifache/DikeDataset/tree/main/files/ben 

ign (accessed Jul. 16, 2024). 

[37] J. A. and M. Ang, “Narrowed Sights, Bigger Payoffs: 

Ransomware in 2019,” TREND , 2019. 

https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/au/security/news/cybercr 

ime -and -digital -threats/narrowed -sights -bigger -payoffs -

ransomware -in -2019 (accessed Oct. 01, 2024). 

[38] Palo Alto Networks, “Unit 42 Ransomware Thre at Report,” 

2020. https://start.paloaltonetworks.com/unit -42 -

ransomware -threat -report.html (accessed Sep. 10, 2024). 

[39] Zscaler, “Zscaler: 2022 ThreatLabz State of Ransomware 

Report,” 2022. https://www.zscaler.com/resources/industry -

reports/2022 -threatla bz -ransomware -report.pdf (accessed 

Oct. 12, 2024). 

[40] Sophos, “Maturing criminal marketplaces present new 

challenges to defenders,” Sophos 2023 Threat Report , 2023. 

https://www.scribd.com/document/628559505/Sophos -

Threat -Report -2023 (accessed Sep. 21, 20 24). 

[41] by B. Symantec, “The Ransomware Threat Landscape,” 

Ransomware Threat Landsc. , 2023, doi: 

10.2307/j.ctv1f8xc7v. 

[42] TREND, “Phobos Emerges as a Formidable Threat in Q1 

2024, LockBit Stays in the Top Spot,” 2024. 

https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/ au/security/news/ransom 

ware -by -the -numbers/phobos -emerges -as -a-formidable -

threat -in -q1 -2024 -lockbit -stays -in -the -top -spot (accessed 

Oct. 12, 2024). 

[43] Cuckoo, “Cuckoo Sandbox - Automated Malware Analysis.” 

https://cuckoosandbox.org/download. 

[44] G. Cao, Y. Ma, and M. Geng, “A reinforcement learning 

based fuzzing technique for binary programs vulnerabilities 

detection,” Array , vol. 27, no. July, p. 100458, 2025, doi: 

10.1016/j.array.2025.100458. 

[45] M. A. Hossain, T. Hasan, F. Ahmed, S. H. Cheragee, M. H. 

Kanchan, and M. A. Haque, “Towards superior android 

ransomware detection: An ensemble machine learning 

perspective,” Cyber Secur. Appl. , vol. 3, no. August 2024, p. 

100076, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.csa.2024.100076. 

[46] M. A. Hossain and M. S. Islam, “Ensurin g network security 

with a robust intrusion detection system using ensemble -

based machine learning,” Array , vol. 19, no. May, p. 100306, 

2023, doi: 10.1016/j.array.2023.100306. 

[47] R. Hasan, B. Biswas, M. A. Saleh, and M. Prabha, 

“Enhancing malware detecti on with feature selection and 

scaling techniques using machine learning models,” pp. 1 –18, 

2025. 

[48] M. S. Abdel -Wahab, A. M. Neil, and A. Atia, “A 

Comparative Study of Machine Learning and Deep Learning 

in Network Anomaly -Based Intrusion Detection System s,” 

Proc. ICCES 2020 - 2020 15th Int. Conf. Comput. Eng. Syst. ,

vol. 26, no. April, 2020, doi: 

10.1109/ICCES51560.2020.9334553.